The good news is the most anti-inflammatory diet in the world is really simple.
And when I say the most anti-inflammatory diet in the world, I'm not comparing different regions
like the Mediterranean versus keto versus that.
I'm talking about compiling and stacking different components without overdoing it.
So, jumping right into it, the baseline diet needs to be very high protein, okay?
And it needs to be relatively low carb.
And it's kind of interesting because when you look at this, that's your baseline.
And then you're going to add these things on top.
So I want you to think of it like this.
It's carnivore diet at baseline, but you're not actually doing carnivore diet.
You're actually adding certain things.
And there's certain carbohydrates that probably should be added because if they're gone out of the
equation, then you're going to have too much in the way of just protein and not enough in the way of
potential insulin spikes that actually might help you recover.
The interesting thing is is Paul Saladino has some merit here.
like this is what he's doing in many ways is probably one of the more anti-inflammatory diets, but
there's other things that we kind of need to layer in there that maybe he's not doing.
I don't know.
I haven't looked super closely at everything he does.
I'm looking at it more so stacking the research here.
So, when you look carnivore at base, what I mean by that is focusing on most of your diet being good
quality, moderate fat, not overly highfat meats.
Right?
We know right now that saturated fat and sugar both in their independent silos can be very
inflammatory.
However, if you're in a caloric deficit and you're not overdoing it, they're probably not that bad
either way, right?
Where we start running into problems is through the refinement and through the alteration.
Right?
So, I'll talk about that in a minute.
But from carnivore diet at baseline, what I mean is eating foods that we've evolved eating, right?
And what I mean by that is foods we've had access to.
The issue that we run into with some plant foods is that they have different impacts on the body.
Some of our inflammatory, some are high in oxalates, some can trigger potential reactions within the
body.
I mean, we use plants all the time in medicine, right?
Because they do different things.
Meat is pretty just baseline simple, right?
That's why so many people go on a anti-inflammatory protocol that is predominantly meat or people
use carnivore as an elimination protocol.
Now, safe to assume that one of the safer foods to eat from an inflammation perspective is going to
be just sheer meat.
But that's also not realistic long term because you're missing out on a few things.
You're missing out on occasional insulin spikes that are probably very important for an active
person.
You're missing out on polyphenols that we're now having evidence of to be extremely anti-
inflammatory.
You're missing out on a couple other certain things that are really important for overall muscular
function and electrolyte function.
So, let's jump into some of these other things.
But first, let's look at a study that was published in the Annals of Medicine, and it took a look at
type 2 diabetics, and they found that when they put them on a low-fat diet or a low carb diet for 6
months, they lost the exact same amount of weight, but the lower carb protocol that still had 20%
carbohydrates, which is what's interesting, ended up having lower inflammation across the board and
better glycemic control.
The glycemic control is kind of obvious.
there's less carbs coming in, but the fact that inflammation lowered indicates that maybe this
higher protein approach was really working well for them.
But what I liked about this study was it wasn't a sheer keto diet and it wasn't straight up
carnivore.
They had adequate amounts of carbohydrates.
Now, in this case, they were probably using basic carbohydrates and starches.
If I was to add the carbohydrates in, here's what I would add.
I'm going to go through it.
Now, as far as the meat is concerned, I will say that one of the more important things to consume is
probably red meat in moderation here.
I say moderation because I do think that you get some benefit from getting other cuts of meat, too.
But I am a personal fan of just going simple ground bison or ground beef at like a 90% lean, just
enough fat to get satiation and feel good, but mainly protein being the key source here.
I link down to my favorite beef that I get, my ground beef that I get from ButcherBox if anyone
wants to try it.
I really do think it's the best tasting and that's why I continue to eat it.
There's lots of good quality meat out there.
Plain and simple, you can find good quality meat if you look hard enough.
But bang for the buck, ButcherBox has the lowest prices on the highest quality meat and it gets
delivered to your doorstep.
At least in my opinion, I find it to be extremely reputable, extremely consistent, and always has an
amazing taste that gets kind of crispy if you cook it just right.
Like the fat quality is so good.
Anyway, I don't think you'll go back to your old source of meat after you try butcher box beef.
It is seriously game-changing and that link is down below in the description.
Why do carbohydrates potentially become important and I'm saying this as a relatively low carb guy?
Let me be very real here.
I very often don't have more than 80 to 100 grams of carbohydrates even on a very active day and I
still go through long periods of time where I keep carbohydrates out entirely.
So, this is coming from a low carb guy.
But I understand that having an occasional insulin spike in a metabolically healthy person is really
really important to stimulate recovery because if muscle damage just continues on and you don't have
the impetus to in help recovery to a certain degree then you put yourself in a state where you have
high levels of oxidative stress which can actually catabolize muscle but also just increase DNA
damage and leading to what's called damage associated molecular patterns.
These are broken strands of DNA and components of our tissue and more so just broken down components
of DNA that are floating around and the immune system reacts to them.
When the immune system reacts to them, what happens?
You have an inflammatory response and this is low-grade chronic inflammation.
Again, more commonly known in the scientific community as damage associated molecular patterns or
DAM.
There's also PAM which is a little bit different, but mainly it's DAMP that we're focused on.
So, how do you recover from that?
Occasional insulin spikes for one if it's damage that's coming from workouts, but also just straight
up antioxidant rich polyphenol rich foods.
So, when we look at like Paul Saladino again, he's looking at adding fruit in.
One of the big things that he did is he added honey in.
Personally, that's the first thing that I added in, which was one of the toughest things for me to
do because I came out of a low carb world where adding honey in seemed absolutely ludicrous.
Paul and I differ a little bit.
Paul likes to chug honey and get lots of carbs from it.
That's his approach and it definitely works for him and I'm not negating what works for him or his
tribe.
For me, I started small, but I noticed that all of a sudden I had like a glow to my skin I didn't
have before.
And I realized that the antimicrobial components, the antibacterial components, but most
importantly, the powerful antioxidants and polyphenols that are in honey were making a huge
difference for me.
So then I increased my dose to a couple tablespoons per day.
Sometimes I have more.
So adding honey in, there is merit there.
And when you look at the inflammatory or the anti-inflammatory effects of honey, the literature is
stacked quite strong.
But the fruit that I probably eat the most of quite frankly is going to be blueberries.
We've got anthocyanins, we've got chlorogenic acid, and we've got queretin.
These three things support an anti-inflammatory system on all three heads.
Like querin helps support the NRF2 pathway and allows us to produce more of the anti-inflammatory
processes within the body.
And then chlorogenic acid itself is anti-inflammatory and one of the most potent antioxidants.
And then anthocyanins are one of the most potent antioxidants for the brain and for
neuroinflammation.
So hugely beneficial.
The interesting thing about blueberries if you have joint issues, it's also a natural cox 2
inhibitor.
That's what an insaid is, right?
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory is a cylo oxygenase enzyme 2 inhibitor.
So you're getting a huge effect there.
Now the other thing that I would add in is going to be pomegranates.
Here you're looking at the overall carbohydrate content to antioxidant ratio with pomegranates and
it's stellar.
Not a ton of carbohydrates but with a lot of alagic acid elagitanins and uralithins which have huge
downstream effects on the mitochondria on the muscle cells themselves and overall inflammation.
I would also recommend adding a lot of Mediterranean spices.
So here's how we're stacking different attributes from different diets, right?
So stacking these different spices, I'm talking about things like rosemary because you have
rosemarinic acid, you have carnosol.
These are some of the most potent anti-inflammatory compounds that we know of in spices.
Okay?
I'd be looking at things like capsain.
I'd be looking at ginger.
And the reason that I would add these in is ginger because of the six shogall and the gingerol.
Again, extremely anti-inflammatory, particularly when it comes down to the gut.
That's why it's so good for digestion, but also tremendous for appetite suppression, right?
Huge effects.
There was a study where people ended up consuming about 50 calories less per day when they just
added 2 grams of ginger powder to water in the morning.
That's that simple.
That was an RCT.
That was a good study.
So, ginger added into the mix is really, really potent.
But also, the Mediterranean spices again like the rosemary, the sage.
Sage is a really good one.
And thyme.
The reason that I mention this is because these can influence at a genetic level the cells to
utilize more fat.
It does this because it influences what's called PP alpha which is a nuclear transcription or a
nuclear receptor protein rather that goes to the center of a cell and changes the cell's affinity to
burn fat.
It's a fat adaptation molecule and the more fat that we oxidize with aerobic metabolism the lower
our inflammatory markers usually are.
Right?
So bottom line is with the diet, you want to kind of add those things in.
But where we forget a big piece of the inflammation puzzle is with our gut itself.
All of this stuff, you could do all this stuff perfect, but if your gut was disrupted, it would not
work well because at the end of the day, you are always going to have what are called gram negative
bacteria in your gut.
And these gram negative bacteria that are in your gut are going to impact and secrete molecules
called lipopolysaccharides that will get through the gut barrier and into the bloodstream.
So if you don't think of the gut first, none of this stuff works.
So things like collagen, things like bone broth, consuming meat that has the actual gristle and the
the connective tissue in it a little bit, that is good for the gut.
But one of the more important things you can do, even if you're not fasting, is taking breaks from
food so that your gut has a time to repair.
Your gut repairs itself in between meals.
So giving yourself these clear defined breaks.
So whether it's going to be sitting down having 15 ounces of steak and a/4 cup of honey as your meal
because it's one large dose or just separating it out into three pieces, that's fine.
But just have these clear breaks between meals.
So when you look at what the most anti-inflammatory diet is, you're just going to be stuck looking
at all these different studies that are really having similar results because the end result is
coming from caloric restriction.
If we stack these different things and we get down to baseline, this kind of protocol would be very
effective.
Although I would recommend having it come at the occasional deficit, not all the time, so you can
always kind of keep your body in that state of AMPK activation as well.
That's going to make it so that you're recovering, but you're also getting caloric restriction
benefits, but you're also getting enough insulin from carbohydrates to induce recovery.
So, as always, keep it locked to here my
