Ryan's question is what would your recommendations be for breaking a 36 hour fast.
Really, the two things that I would think about are your digestion, it's probably going to take a
little bit of time to ramp itself up.
I don't think you're going to do any harm by eating things that are difficult to digest, probably
not great for your microbiome, but probably something that would just adapt to you.
And so I would take that very subjectively.
In your experience, what types of things do you have trouble digesting from when you stop a fast?
But I think it's going to be fairly common to feel like some things just don't digest this well when
you come off at 36 hour fast than you otherwise would.
I think that's very subjective.
My main concern from a health perspective would be feeding syndrome.
So generally when you're fasting, you lose phosphorus because the phosphorus is associated with
carbohydrate metabolism and your glycogen levels have been depleted.
And the phosphorus is associated with ATP.
Your ATP levels have been depleted.
You will lose phosphorus from your body.
You also lose magnesium and you also lose potassium and with magnesium that's because it's also
associated with the ATP.
And then the potassium, it's a little bit more complicated and it's related both to insulin having
effect on potassium.
And I think it's probably also related to some of the acid based buffering that goes on during
fasting.
But in any case when you have a sudden influx of food, you can drive all those nutrients back into
the cells and maybe their serum levels were normal, but you push them down.
And so, if you find that you recover fine from the 36 hour fast and you don't have any problems with
it, I wouldn't say everyone has to do this, but I do think that a lot of people might have an easier
transition if they supplement with something like a hundred milligrams of magnesium, 200 milligrams
of potassium citrate, and maybe two or 300 milligrams of phosphorus.
If you go on Amazon, you can find good phosphorus supplement, for example.
And that might ease any of the refeeding syndrome things that you might experience.
And then in terms of food sources, eating a lot of potassium rich plant foods and phosphorous rich
meat and eggs would probably be the best way to get those nutrients from the diet.
So one way of restating that would be don't refeed based on low nutrient foods.
Refeed based on, apart from digestive concerns, on meat, eggs and high potassium, high magnesium
vegetables.
All right, thank you for your question, Ryan.
