Kate M says, "My mother has osteoporosis.
She's on an osteoporosis drug, but I'd have to ask her to remind me which one and is recovering from
a recent wrist fracture.
What are your nutritional supplement recommendations for her healing?
For instance, she takes Innovix's K2 supplement that you suggested.
Would taking two of the K2 pills instead of one be helpful?
Thanks." I actually have a bone healing protocol that I used for myself when I broke my toe a couple
of years ago, doing Brazilian Jiu Jitsu.
Let me see if I can pull that up easily.
Actually, I never published this.
I gave it to a consulting client, but anyway, when I broke my toe, what I did was, and this was
based on extremely quick research onto what was plausible and this mostly is not based on things
that have randomized controlled trials showing that they quicken bone healing.
This is based on, what are the mechanisms of bone healing and what would be plausible as things that
could help.
And so my protocol was 10 grams of citrulline a day divided evenly across meals taken before the
meal.
And that's based on improving nitric oxide-based blood vessel dilation which is critical to getting
nutrients into the spot that needs healing.
1500 milligrams of calcium from bone meal powder.
And the bone meal powder is important as the source of calcium because it also provides phosphorus
equivalent to the amount that matches the amount of calcium needed for bone, as well as other trace
minerals, all in proportion to how they appear in the bone.
One heaping tablespoon of collagen at every meal with 200 milligrams of vitamin C mixed in.
And that's to support collagen synthesis since roughly 50% of bone is collagen and 95...
I mean there's protein and 95% of bone protein is collagen.
400 milligrams of magnesium glycinate per day preferably divided between meals and that's...
Well, there is magnesium in bone, but I probably was including that mostly for to support energy
production needed for healing.
Three milligrams of manganese per day.
That I believable was for the...
Probably to support the production of proteoglycans in joint matrix.
Three to 5,000 IU of vitamin D, 10,000 IU vitamin A, one milligram of vitamin K2 preferably divided
between MK-4 and MK-7.
20 IU of alpha-tocopherol along with other mixed tocopherols and tocotrienols.
So that's because A, D and K are all needed for bone protein synthesis especially for certain
proteins that are needed either to become part of the bone matrix as in osteocalcin or to allow
calcium to get into the bone matrix, such as matrix gla protein or MGP.
And the vitamin E is there mainly because if vitamin E will be depleted by the other fat-soluble
vitamins if you don't co-supplement it.
And then eat a nutrient dense diet, salt food to taste, supplement anything that might be limiting.
So the things above are the special things, but every vitamin and mineral and macronutrient,
including salt will be necessary to build any tissue, all of them.
So do analyze your diet and make sure you're not missing anything.
And then the last bullet point is eat a lot of food.
Err on the side of eating too much and gaining weight, not on the side of avoiding gaining weight.
And that's because you need lots of calories and lots of ATP to do anabolic things.
And the last thing you want to do is limit your bone healing because you're trying to avoid gaining
weight.
If you gain weight, you can always lose weight after the bone is healed.
And then, oh, the other reason for that is that healing bones can require a lot of energy and can
create a caloric deficit.
So what I wrote to my client at the end of this was healing bones can drop blood levels of
phosphorus, magnesium and calcium.
Oh, that was the reason the magnesium was in there.
I totally forgot about that because hungry bone syndrome, which hasn't been studied to my knowledge
in the case of healing a broken bone, but has been studied in the case of fixing a bone resorption
disorder like primary hyperparathyroidism.
You fix that clinically and then all of a sudden the bone starts rapidly accreting minerals.
And so it steals the phosphorus, magnesium and calcium from the blood.
So I felt intuitively when my toe is healing, that I had hungry bone syndrome and that I had a
caloric deficit and that I was sapping every ounce of energy in me to heal the toe.
And so I understand if people say my intuition isn't science, but this protocol is partly based on
my intuition that that is exactly how I felt when my toe was healing and it seems plausible.
So anyway, I went on, "After the bone heals, if you were in a caloric deficit, you could experience
some refeeding syndrome, which can lower blood levels of phosphorus, magnesium and potassium.
If you get dizzy or twitchy, supplement with these minerals further and eat more food, but eat small
frequent meals rather than large meals." This was based less on my speculation and more that I felt
like all of this happened to me.
So I felt like I was in a caloric deficit from healing the toe that I was experiencing hungry bone
syndrome.
And that the more I did to fix those as I improved my caloric intake, I was experiencing some level
of refeeding syndrome.
And so I designed the protocol to layer on top of my already already potassium-rich diet, which
would be more relevant to the refeeding syndrome.
The things that are not only necessary based on the mechanisms of bone healing from reviews that I
was reading, but also based on my intuition that these adverse effects of healing the bone could
come up and those needed to be dealt with too.
All right.
So hope that helps Kate.
Thank you for your question.
