The winner of the question submission contest comes from Christina Kang, and her question is, "How
to slow graying of hairs and potentially reverse it?" Well, if I knew the answer to that, I would
probably have less gray hair.
As you can see, I obviously don't know the answer to this.
But I will go over the biology a bit and I'll go over some of what I believe could be known about
it.
I'll say at the outset that my mother had her first gray hair at the age of 14, and I had my first
gray hair at the age of 25.
Everyone knows this, but there's obviously a psychosocial stress component to graying of hair, but I
do suspect that there's a genetic basis to the graying of hair shared by my mom and me, and I do
wonder if my adventures in trying to solve energy metabolism issues that seem to have a genetic
basis starting with biotin may lead me in the right direction on that.
With that said, let's go to what we know about the biology.
So hair pigment production is regulated at the level of the brain and through the hypothalamic-
pituitary- especially -thyroidal and -gonadal axes, as a result of a collection of neuropeptides,
which include all of the hypothalamic neuropeptides that regulate the pituitary hormones, but also
include some others, such as alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone.
This collection is central in positively regulating the production of hair pigment.
There are other factors, such as growth factors, inflammatory mediators, circadian rhythm mediators,
that have been implicated, and there is some evidence that autophagic flux, meaning cycling in and
out of autophagy to destroy senescent cells and poorly working things to be replaced with fresh
things is all important.
Now, if you just look at some of the nutrients involved in the neuropeptide production, all of the
peptides involved in hair production are activated in a process that depends on vitamin C, copper,
zinc, and glycine.
Then when you get to some of their downstream effects, you have, for example, thyroid hormone
production is dependent on iodine, selenium, nourishment with sufficient calories, adequate body
fat, and the right macronutrient balance.
I would argue that that macronutrient balance would be favoring adequate protein and sufficient
carbohydrate to convince the body that energy is abundant, which I think is likely to very much
depend on the individual.
I don't think everyone needs to eat the same amount of carbohydrate, but I do think there's a very
clear relationship where carbohydrate has a positive signaling role in thyroid hormone production
because carbohydrate is important as a versatile energy source, being able to play roles in energy
metabolism that fat is not able to play.
And so I do believe that there's a positive role for insulin, leptin, and the insulin-to-glucagon
ratio, all of which are influenced by adequate body fat as a long-term storage of energy and
adequate carbohydrate as a signal of short-term storage of energy that are "convincing" the
hypothalamic-pituitary-effector axes, all three of them, thyroidal, gonadal, and adrenal, that you
are in a state of energy abundance, and then this feeds forward into the ability of the hormones to
regulate your metabolism in a way that leads to robust energy metabolism and a robust support for
the antioxidant system by energy metabolism.
And if you're looking at thyroid hormone just alone, you're looking at iodine and selenium and then
all of that, right?
Because producing thyroid hormone is an incredibly oxidative...
Actually, this is true of both thyroid hormone and melanin pigment.
Both of these processes are extremely oxidative in nature and therefore depend on broad-based
antioxidant protection, and then, as a result of that, rely deeply on the entire system of energy
metabolism, because if you look at something, I think the sort of enzymatic reaction that
encapsulates the dependence of the antioxidant system on the system of energy metabolism is the
glutathione reductase enzyme, where it is a riboflavin-dependent enzyme that is using energy carried
by niacin in the form of NADPH from the system of energy metabolism to power and fuel the entire
antioxidant system.
I'll post in the show notes a pretty recent review on the biology of hair loss.
And I think everyone wants to know exactly what's going on differently between an individual hair
that's graying and one that's not, and people that go gray prematurely and those who don't, people
who go gray eventually and those who don't, and there's a lot of research that is suggestive, but
there really is no smoking gun.
But I think two of the compelling lines of evidence about what is happening is you have a general
reduction in the neuroendocrine axes that I was just talking about in the signaling to maintain hair
pigment, and then you also have oxidative damage, which is to be expected because it's such an
oxidative environment in the hair follicle in the way that producing thyroid hormone requires such a
dangerously oxidative environment.
So when I look at this, I think, well, probably people can come up with drugs that support certain
growth axes or something like that, stem cell treatments and whatever, but looking at it from a root
cause perspective, I think it's very complex.
I think the disease, the sort of binary diagnose-a-disease-or-not, pick-a-treatment-for-it model of
medicine, I think, has limitations even for diseases because even when you have something very
specific going on, you still have your antioxidant system and your energy metabolism system running
in the background where if you have a 10% decrement in energy metabolism beneath what's ideal, it's
going to make it that much harder to heal from any disease.
But I think with hair graying, I don't think you have a disease.
I think hair is a form of peacocking, right?
So the peacock has artistically elaborate feathers to show its mate that it has energy that it can
burn.
Socially, humans peacock by buying a car that other people can't afford or using a status symbol in
some way that they can show that they have money to burn.
But biologically, hair is peacocking in very much the same way, and it is a general manifestation of
the body not being able to meet all of its priorities, I think.
And I think some ways to look at that is just that if you look at risk factors for premature
graying, you'll see associations with obesity, high blood pressure, dyslipidemia, and disease of
aging as well.
Sorry, I lost my notes.
One second.
Oh, here it went.
Sorry, I minimized one of my windows.
Here's what I want to say.
So gray hair is an age-independent predictor of Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and
cardiovascular disease.
And so I think that all indicates that you are not going to find a specific sort of, "This is the
cause of gray hair," that you are going to be able to then find, "This is the treatment," and I
would not expect general treatments to work for everyone because X solves gray hair.
What I would expect from this type of causality is that you need to find the weakest link in your
antioxidant protection or your energy metabolism in terms of the actual production of energy, right?
So when we're looking at energy metabolism, we're looking at all of the B vitamins, we're looking at
iron, copper, sulfur, magnesium, potassium, et cetera, and that's the mechanical infrastructure you
need to produce energy.
But then there's also the signaling that I was talking about before, right?
So the feed forward of adequate body fat and the right macronutrient mix to signal to your body that
you have what you need to be able to burn energy in a confident and abundant manner, right?
In other words, the biochemical signals that you're in a state of abundance rather than scarcity.
I think you need to look at those three areas, antioxidant support, energy metabolism support, on a
fundamental mechanical being-able-to-produce-energy level, and then also on the feed forward of the
signaling that you have adequate energy that feeds into the neuroendocrine regulation of hair
pigmentation.
Now, I think that perspective is supported by how awful the treatment literature is.
So I have this systematic review in front of me from 2020, so it's not that old.
I'll link in the show notes.
It's called Premature graying of hair: Risk factors, co-morbid conditions, pharmacotherapy and
reversal - A systematic review and meta-analysis, and they look at vitamin and mineral deficiencies,
thyroid hormone drugs, et cetera, and there's 36 studies in here, but you just read the description
and it's terrible, right?
So section 3.6.1, P-Amino benzoic acid, or PABA, which is, of course, part of the folate molecule
and the BH4 molecule.
"In a study of 50 patients with definite achromotrichia, 30 cases received only PABA and the rest 20
cases received PABA was given in..." English is also terrible in this paper.
"30 cases received PABA only and 20 cases received PABA in some combination with some endocrine
products for concomitant release.
It was observed that all the cases had darkening of hair after about two months." What the hell is
that supposed to mean?
So there was no control group, and they treated 50 people with a bunch of stuff, and everyone had
darkening of hair, right?
When your systematic review needs to have a whole section and that is the content of the section,
you know that the state of the literature is absolutely abominable.
Section 3.62, Calcium pantothenate, which is a salt of pantothenic acid, which is a form of vitamin
B5 and a precursor to 4'-phosphopantetheine and coenzyme A, which are incredibly important co-
factors used in energy metabolism.
So this is the section there.
"In a study of 19 patients, elderly men, as the age is not mentioned, seven received 100 milligrams
calcium pantothenate and 200 milligrams PABA, plus 50 grams of brewer's yeast daily, five patients
received yeast plus PABA, and the other seven patients received yeast plus calcium pantothenate for
eight months.
Significant recoloration was seen in two patients in the PABA plus calcium pantothenate plus
brewer's yeast arm." And that's the end of that study.
So two patients out of the seven that received that, what are we supposed to conclude from this?
I mean, I think that some of this is random, but I also think that that's kind of what you would
expect from the model that I would use to think about this, which is maybe two of the seven
patients, their limiting factor for energy metabolism was that they ran low in pantothenic acid and
they needed more coenzyme A.
Another study by Pasricha et al., where two adolescent girls were given 200 milligrams calcium
pantothenate orally, which led to the conversion into black hairs.
All right, so that's a case series of two girls.
This study was followed by another one, which looked at 200 milligrams of calcium pantothenate in
addition to gray hair avulsion in 39 girls, and after the last follow-up at three years, the mean
change in total number of gray hairs from baseline was 43.
I don't even find that description intelligible.
Anyway, the point is that I don't think that we're ever going to come to the point where this is a
treatment for gray hair unless it's of the nature of a pharmacological sort of force the
differentiation of the melanocyte type of approach or it's implants, but I think what's going to
lead us to a solution on this is to look for what are the limiting factors in energy metabolism,
antioxidant support, and the neuroendocrine signaling of energy abundance, and I think that's highly
likely to be different for different people.
I think really the three factors that you're going to want to look at are...
And by the way, this explains the psychosocial stress component, right?
Because the stress response through cortisol is opposing the abundance response through leptin and
insulin, which spills forward into the hypothalamic, pituitary, thyroidal, and gonadal axes.
So anyway, maybe your stress response or the stressors you have or however you're coping with them
is the limiting factor among those and it's the primary thing that's impacting the neuroendocrine
signaling of energy abundance.
Or maybe calcium pantothenate is what you needed because your deficiency, your limiting factor was
having sufficient CoA derived from pantothenic acid in the mechanical production of energy.
Or maybe it's calories for you, or it's body fat for you, or it's iodine for you, or it's go on down
the list of all the factors that influence antioxidant protection, the mechanics of energy
production, and the neuroendocrine signaling of energy abundance.
And I think that it's lifestyle, nutrition, and also, where I'm really focusing my energy now in my
own health adventure, I believe that there are not that many people who do not have some carrier
status for one of the 1,400-plus inborn errors of metabolism that is physiologically, biochemically
meaningful to them as an influence on their metabolism.
And so if some, I'm not sure what the number is, third or half of those, some hundreds of those, are
directly in the pathway of energy metabolism, then I suspect that that's going to create an enormous
amount of diversity in what the limiting factor for any given person's energy metabolism is because
it may be that a lot of people, maybe a third of people, or half of people, or more than that, don't
just need to look in Cronometer and see what's deficient, but after everything's sufficient, might
have some limiting factor in their energy metabolism, where understanding the key genetic bottleneck
in their energy metabolism would unlock maybe one thing that they should supplement with, and that
might be the most important thing for them to supplement with to reverse premature graying of hair,
not because that thing is X and X reverses premature hair graying, but because that X factor for
them was the limiting factor for their energy metabolism personally, and it is their energy
metabolism personally and the brain's understanding that the energy metabolism is there and is there
abundantly, that's the limiting factor for the body to confidently produce pigment as a signal of
having plenty of energy to go around.
So that's my answer on hair graying.
So thank you very much, Christina, for your question.
I feel like that it wasn't a smoking gun sort of answer, but I think it was an honest answer, and
hopefully it was helpful.
