Maple syrup is just dehydrated tree.
So, it's pretty much pure sugar, isn't it?
I mean, if you look at sugar compared to maple syrup compared to honey, I mean, they're all
carbohydrates.
They're all sugars.
They do different things in the body.
And I want to look at maple syrup specifically.
If maple syrup is just pure sugar cuz it's dehydrated sap, then how does it respond differently in
the body?
There's a few things that make maple syrup different from sugar.
We'll talk about them vaguely, and then we'll get into the literature.
Number one, if you look at maple syrup, there's different darknesses, right?
There's different levels of like how dark it is.
Some are very clear, some are very dark.
The darker the maple syrup, the more the antioxidant content.
Now, we know from other literature that antioxidants are potent when it comes down to improving
insulin resistance.
So, right then and there, we know something's different.
I would almost consider maple syrup more of a whole food, whereas sugar is just more of a sugar.
Additionally, maple syrup in and of itself has a lower glycemic index.
We're looking at like a 54 versus a 65 compared to sugar.
So, already it's lower glycemic.
That's not what we're here to talk about.
Anyone can Google that.
The next thing is the mineral content.
Once again, you have 25% of your daily value of zinc in a pretty much a small serving of maple syrup
and like 125% of your manganesees and other minerals as well.
So, there's definitely a mineral component.
So, again, full spectrum.
It's more of a food, but let's look at the scientific literature.
Before we jump into it, I put a link down below for some other minerals that are important just for
everyday life like sodium, potassium, and magnesium.
And you can find those in element.
So, that is a link for a free sample variety pack of element electrolytes with any purchase.
So you can get their chocolate salt flavor, you can get their lemon lime, you can get their regular
lemonade flavor.
All this stuff is amazing and they have ready to drink sparkling cans as well.
So this stuff is epic and it's getting you pretty much a zero calorie or 5 calorie way to get your
minerals in, curb your appetite, and just have something that tastes good.
So that link is down below.
This stuff has been such a game changer for me for the years.
Like when it comes down to just being able to like go through the day without feeling like I need to
munch on stuff all the time.
Plus, my brain feels sharper because salt is so critical for that neurological function for these
neuronal signaling.
So that link is down below.
Let's talk insulin.
There was a study that was published in the journal of functional foods.
This study took a look at dextrose, brown rice syrup, corn syrup, and compared it to maple syrup.
They found that the maple syrup had a lower blood sugar response and a lower insulin response.
Well, that's good news right there in and of itself.
Unfortunately, that was in rodents.
So, let's look at some human data.
Now, human data is lacking, but there is a newer study.
It was a 42 person crossover design trial where they gave subjects a couple tablespoons of maple
syrup or a couple tablespoons of liquid sucrose, basically liquid table sugar.
And they had them do that for 4 weeks and then they crossed over.
They they switched groups and did it again for another four weeks.
What they found was interesting.
The group that had the maple syrup in both instances ended up having a better score on their oral
glucose tolerance test.
What that means is when they gave them sugar, they had better insulin sensitivity, better insulin
response, better glucose uptake.
They literally handled the glucose better.
So what that tells us is that maple syrup is just less daunting and less throttling on the body in
terms of the glycemic impact.
Overall, it had a better impact on insulin sensitivity and insulin resistance.
The reason behind this could be a few different things, but for one, it's probably the antioxidant
profile.
So, let's talk about this for a second.
There's a study published in pharmaceutical biology that took a look at maple syrup, medium grade
maple syrup.
So, not even super high quality stuff, just medium grade.
And they identified 24 different active compounds in maple syrup.
They found things like benzoic acid.
They found gelic acid.
They found cafeic acid.
They found flavvenols like epiatakin and katakin.
Those are things that you're going to find in green tea.
They also found queretin which is what you'd find in high concentrations in like capers.
I personally take queretin supplements because queretin is so awesome.
So bottom line is there's a lot of compounds.
Not to mention the researchers said there were quote unquote multiple other phinolic compounds but
they were in such small quantities they weren't really worth listing out.
However, it is at least speculated that it's not any one particular compound that's having an
impact.
It's the collective nature of all these different small amounts of antioxidants and flavinols that
make maple syrup so unique.
As a matter of fact, the researchers even said, and I quote, "The mixture of antioxidants rather
than any one compound counteracts the unhealthy effects of sugar in maple syrup." Okay, so we are
admitting that sugar is problematic, but what's interesting is that maple syrup might have compounds
that help counteract some of the negative attributes of sugar.
So, how do we choose the right maple syrup?
Well, it seems as though the darker the better.
Here's another study to back this up.
It's quite interesting, though.
The journal of medicinal food compared 30 different types of maple syrup and they again they found
that the darker the maple syrup the higher the antioxidant content.
They also found lower the nitric oxide synthes levels in the human body meaning there was more of an
antioxidant activity in the body when darker maple syrups.
We do know that antioxidants reduce oxidative stress.
Okay, like antioxidant oxidative stress that's the whole point of an antioxidant.
And we know quite clearly that reducing oxidative stress improves insulin resistance.
So although there's not a randomized control trial with maple syrup on insulin resistance, we can at
least infer at least to a certain degree with pretty strong strong feelings that or at least data, I
don't want to say feelings, but data that maple syrup is probably better than regular sugar when it
comes down to insulin resistance because of the antioxidant profile.
But to back this up, there was another study published in journal functional foods where they took
maple syrup that had two phinolate compounds sort of exacerbated.
They took two of the phinolic compounds.
Words are not worth even trying to pronounce here because they're complicated, but these are active
in maple syrup.
And they sort of enhanced those to make them more strong to see what impact they would have.
They found that when subjects consumed this honey, it ended up inhibiting what is called alpha
gluccoidase and alpha amalayise.
These are enzymes that break down carbohydrates, sugars, starches.
So when those are inhibited, you don't break down the sugars as much and they stay in the gut more,
which may explain why, we'll talk about a little bit.
There's an effect on the gut microbiome, too.
made some of the sugar somewhat indigestible because we lack the enzyme to break them down.
Therefore, less blood glucose, insulin response with it.
Again, all because of phenolic compounds, antioxidants, flavonols.
It's a different sugar than a table sugar that's refined, bleached, and stripped of all its minerals
and nutrients.
Let's talk inflammation for a moment.
Here's a big piece.
We think inflammation is just something that happens when you get older, or it's just what happens
when you retain water.
I mean, inflammation is a bummer, right?
This is like a hallmark characteristic of people that are unhealthy, metabolically unhealthy, or
just don't feel good.
There was a study published in Helon and it was a large analysis taking a look at maple syrup's
impact on inflammation in spite of having sugar in it.
They found that once again the phinyl compounds in maple syrup reduce interlucan 1 beta which is
like the precursor to an inflammatory spike and also prostaglandin E2.
You remember all the talk about like seed oils being inflammatory or at least a lack of omega-3s
being inflammatory.
That's all prostaglandon E2 we're talking about there.
So when you are in a state of having increased inflammation, prostaglandon E2s elevate.
It seems as though maple syrup has compounds in it that actually bring those prostaglandon E2s down,
similar to like how omega-3s would, not in the same fashion, of course, but similarly to how we
would look at that.
Researchers also noticed that there is an inhibition of nitric oxide synthes, which is usually
happening just prior to inflammation, and a subsequent reduction in what is called nuclear factor
cap B, which is like sort of a master switch for inflammation within the body.
So, we're not talking any like small little, oh, we measured a slight decrease in interlucan 6.
No, there was actually a decrease in the master regulator of inflammation with maple syrup
consumption.
There were a couple compounds specifically in the maple syrup that reduced nitric oxide syntheses or
nitric oxide levels by 92.5% and reduced prostaglandon E2 levels by 89.5%.
Nothing to sneeze at.
Again, where do you draw the line?
Like if you have 300 grams of sugar from maple syrup, you're not going to be putting yourself in the
best spot and it's not going to be good and you're going to end up in a bad situation, especially if
you're in a surplus.
So if you're at a maintenance calories or slight deficit, swapping out regular sugar for maple syrup
could be quite the game changer for you.
There is one particular ingredient called Quebecol that is in maple syrup that seems to directly
have an impact on reducing inflammation.
Though there was uh some literature that demonstrated that it can reduce lipopolysaccharide induced,
so basically leaky gut induced inflammation.
Most of the time with maple syrup, it's again, it's the combination of all these different
ingredients and compounds, but Quebec all seems to be unique in and of itself.
Now, let's pivot over to visceral fat and fatty liver for a second.
Wild, wild stuff.
This study was published in nutrients, and it was done in rats, but it's very fascinating.
What they did is they gave rats a highfat, high sugar diet for 8 weeks, and then they gave them
either 1 gram of sugar, refined sugar, or one gram of various natural sweeteners like maple syrup,
agave, things like that.
They found that maple syrup significantly reduced insulin resistance compared to the other sugars
especially the refined sugar and significantly reduced interlucan 1 beta in the liver.
Okay, so it reduced inflammation in the liver and reduced insulin resistance markers.
That alone is the recipe for fatty liver and a recipe for visceral fat accumulation.
So, when you reduce those, you're potentially reducing visceral fat and you're potentially reducing
fatty liver just by swapping out sugar for maple syrup.
Now, you don't have to just take my word for it.
I'm going to read an excerpt from the study and the researchers themselves.
Natural sweeteners, especially maple syrup, molasses, and agave syrup, attenuate the development of
insulin resistance and reduce hpatic inflammation compared to sucrose in overfed rat.
We know this is in rat, but we do have good literature in humans, too.
More literature needs to come out.
We need more studies, but pretty darn fascinating.
There was one more study in endocrinology and metabolism.
Another fascinating one where they took a look at the microbiome and they found that a regular
baseline diet with 10% just changing 10% of the calories to come from maple syrup versus regular
sugar.
Maple syrup ended up changing the microbiome so dramatically that it impacted glucose uptake
overall.
It impacted the bacteria that specifically aid with the short- chain fatty acids that help glucose
metabolism.
At the end of the day, I want you to remember that a carb is a carb is a carb.
If you are counting carbs, I don't care what carb it is.
If you're counting carbs, the number matters.
But if you're not counting carbs and you're trying to eat a nutrient-rich diet, I do think there is
merit to swapping out your regular sugar for maple syrup.
Just go for the darker, thicker, later harvest.
The later the harvest, the more powerful the antioxidants.
I'll see you tomorrow.
