Anon Anon says: "Hi Chris, what diet would you recommend for hungry teenage boys in terms of macros
for each meal and also food groups?
Could also please comment on: 1.
The maximum number of eggs they can eat per day?
2.
The maximum amount of protein per meal?
3.
Is protein powder, for example, beef protein isolate safe for them?
4.
Any ideas how to safely satisfy their hunger on a budget and without overdoing carbs?
Many thanks.
My name is Steph O'D, I can't change the Anon setting.
Okay.
Hi Steph.
So I don't really, I mean my advice from general macros is quite limited and has nothing to do with
age, for the most part, with the exception of minor tweaking of protein requirements as people get
older.
So I guess I would say whether teenage boys or teenage girls, or almost anyone else, then the only
macro that you need to really regulate in any kind of quantitative sense is protein.
And you really don't need to think about maximums of protein or eggs or any of this other stuff.
You really just need to make sure that they're getting the minimum amount of protein.
And so I would say that just generally speaking, the good range to be for protein for almost anyone
is between a half a gram to a gram of protein per pound of body weight assuming that you measure
your body weight in pounds.
For people that are measuring it in kilograms, then basically just double those numbers.
So, one to two grams per kilogram of body weight, which is not quite exactly equivalent, but almost
the same.
It's close enough.
And then you really want to just make sure that they're getting all their vitamins and minerals in,
which is going to require you to eat a mix of foods.
And so obviously if you only eat protein, especially if you only eat protein powder, you're not
going to get all your vitamins and minerals in.
But I think that if you focus first on getting in the good, in the range of minimum protein intake,
and then you focus on getting all your vitamins and minerals in, then you wind up, you sort of wind
up automatically eating a mix of carbs and fat.
And there you might find that some people do better on higher carb lower fat or higher fat lower
carb.
But I think that, that's not as important as making sure someone's getting all their vitamins and
minerals.
And then particularly for teenage boys, then, you know, just with a rapid rate of growth and high
activity and hormonal changes kicking in, the demand for nutrients is generally elevated in
teenagers as a proportion of their, whether daily intake or even as a proportion relative to their
caloric intake, most likely.
And that's especially true if they're going through a growth spurt.
So I would say for the same thing, as I would say for an adult, the best way to go about looking at
whether you're getting your vitamins and minerals in is to use an app such as Cronometer and just do
a dietary analysis.
Cover enough days that you are getting a representative view of your typical diet.
So if they're eating the same thing all the time, then you could probably just do three days, but
they're probably not eating the same thing all the time.
So you might want to do two weeks worth of data.
If you find that that's what it takes in order to get all of their sort of cyclical food changes
represented.
And see if they're getting their vitamins and minerals in.
I would Google "Masterjohn how to measure your vitamins and minerals" because I have a video there
that should probably pop up in the first place on Google.
It's about how to avoid false zeroes in your data for Cronometer.
So you do have to be mindful of that, but as long as you are making sure that you ensure the data
accuracy through a few simple steps that I outlined in that video, you should get a pretty good view
of the vitamins and minerals.
And as long as you make sure that you're hitting all of the targets, and I would be less lenient
about maybe not quite getting all the way up to the targets for teenage boys, just because I do
expect them to be less able to get away with modest deficits in a nutrient when they're growing a
lot.
But just let the fat and carbs fall where they will and adjust the diet if you need to meet those
micronutrient goals.
And then with the eggs, I don't see any point in putting a cap on the number of eggs they can eat in
a day.
I would, if they're, I think you're going to hit a cap in the number of eggs they are willing to eat
in a day before you would hit a cap in the safe number of eggs a day.
So that's what I think.
Okay, so protein powder isolate.
That's fine.
But just as with an adult, I wouldn't use it for a huge portion of your calories or of your protein
I mean.
Which is ironic because right now I'm actually getting most of my protein from protein powder, but
that's a very temporary thing while I carve out the last few pounds of weight loss that I'm
targeting.
So in speaking for general dietary concerns, I would say it's probably fine to get 20 to 40 grams
per day of protein from protein powder, but I wouldn't do more than that because at some point
you're rather quickly going to be pushing out nutritious foods.
And I generally would say also that if you're not specifically trying to do something with your body
composition, you probably shouldn't be using protein powder that much, because what for?
Protein powder is a very good way to boost your protein up when you have a difficult time meeting
your needs with food, which might, which is going to become more relevant if you're trying to gain
hypertrophy muscle growth, or you're trying to lean out or something like that.
But if you're just trying to eat right, then you can, there's no harm in getting a small amount of
your protein from protein powder.
I would cap that at, like I said, 20 to 40 grams, but it's always better to eat food.
In terms of a budget, I'm not the best person to ask about budget stuff, but I mean generally
speaking lentils are real cheap and very nutritious.
But it's hard to comment on how to optimize for budget without knowing the details of what your
finances are and what specifically you're having trouble with the price on and what you mean by
overdoing the carbs.
Because obviously lentils have a bit of carb in them, but if you're going to, I guess it depends
what you're replacing, right?
So if you're replacing meat with lentils, your fats going down, your proteins, going down, your
carbs are going way up, but if you replace bread with lentils, your protein is going way up and your
carbs are coming down.
And so in particular it'd be hard to meet your protein requirement all with lentils, but lentils go
a lot further towards your protein requirement than potatoes and especially bread and rice do and
they are pretty cheap.
And they're very nutritious compared to a lot of other carby foods.
And then of course you can choose the quality of food that suits your budget.
So I would prefer the organic grass-fed beef, but if you can't afford organic grass-fed beef, then I
wouldn't be so ideological about it that I wouldn't buy lower-quality beef, you know?
So I think you should buy the best quality food that you can afford, but I think it's okay to
sacrifice some quality issues and not be ideological about it if you have trouble affording the type
of quality that you would prefer.
If you're talking about the difference between eating meat, vegetables, and legumes, compared to
eating chips and microwavable ramen noodles, and cake, then you're getting, you don't need to eat
organic heirloom lentils grown in regenerative agriculture-practiced soil.
If you just go from cake and chips to lentils, you are achieving huge things in the improvement in
your food quality.
So to summarize on the budget, I think using legumes as a major staple in the diet will help get you
to a good place with vitamins and minerals, and towards a higher protein than you would get with
other carby foods and with cheap junk food.
But I would balance that with also trying to save money on making reasonable compromises on the
grade of quality of foods that you would make so that you are also getting the other things that you
need in, because you're not going to get everything you need in with lentils.
So anyway, hope that helped Steph.
Thank you very much for your question.
