I am extra cautious talking about things like this.
This is why I have not done a lot of videos on heavy metals and how to potentially detoxify your
brain of them.
And I'm not going to go and make some crazy claims with it.
I'm going to talk about the hard science.
So, it's been 10 years running this channel and I've literally never done a video on this because I
wanted to wait for something that actually had science behind it.
I'm not going to leave you hanging.
Carnosine.
So carnosine we can get in meat but it seems like getting it from supplements might be a little bit
better in terms of actually getting our tissue levels high enough to really have this effect.
So we're going to talk about how the literature is showing it can potentially sequester heavy metals
in the brain particularly in the kind of copper ion category.
So we'll talk about how that works really fascinating research and also how to use it and maybe just
a little bit more of a speculative like other things that you can do to potentially help with this.
Right.
Okay.
Okay, so let's go ahead and dive into it.
And additionally, like if you are looking for just detoxification pathways from the body, I highly
recommend you use a sauna.
I put a link down below for Bond Charges infrared sauna blanket.
Most people can't just put a sauna at their house.
It's expensive.
It takes up a ton of space.
Quite frankly, it's a pain in the butt to run the electrical and have a dedicated circuit for, it's
just a pain.
about having a sauna blanket that you can travel with, that you can fold up and put in your closet,
gets up to 172°.
This thing makes you sweat in minutes, and it's convenient as heck.
So, I would be lying if I didn't say I use it all the time, right?
I really do.
I have good saunas at my house, but my infrared sauna blanket makes the most logical sense for me
many times.
I can literally be in the house watching TV, hanging out with the kids, and I can be in the sauna.
So, that link is down below.
That gets you 25% off their sauna blanket from Bond Charge.
So again, using that link and that code in the top of the description, 25% off.
So this study was published in the journal of molecular liquids looking at carnosine.
And what it does is it has the ability to sequester particular heavy metals in the brain.
You might be wondering like is heavy metals in the brain even a real thing?
Absolutely.
Okay.
Especially copper buildup.
So copper, manganesees, these and zinc especially these build up in the brain and are heavily
correlated with neurodeenerative conditions.
It's like when you have too much of these building up, again, zinc is great, manganese is great,
copper is great, but we're happen to have them in balance, right?
You don't want to have too much of them, especially something like copper, which is highly
conductive, right?
So, we're talking about energetics of the brain.
The brain is still electrical at the end of the day.
And when you're having these metals that are building up, this could be problematic.
There's this thing that's called finton chemistry, and it's when these hydroxal radicals actually
build up as a result of some of these heavy metals, and they cause DNA damage.
They cause oxidative stress and of course as a result of that there's going to be a trickle effect
of inflammation.
Neuroinflammation is like the common theme amongst neurodeenerative conditions and poor cognitive
function.
Where you have your brain not working or brain fog you have neuroinflammation.
Plain and simple.
So as we get older we tend to accumulate more in the way of zinc.
We tend to accumulate a little bit more in the way of manganesees and more in the way of copper.
Now, with carnosine specifically, carnosine seems to have very powerful sequestration effects on
copper, which means it's helping move it away from the traditional area of the brain that it might
have an impact on and make it more possible to remove it.
And this is where we look at the other side of things.
We'll talk about dosing.
With dosing, carnosine is safe.
Most people take a form of carnosine or a uh like a preliminary piece of carnosine without even
realizing they If you ever take a pre-workout, you're probably having beta alanine.
It's what makes you feel tingly, right?
That tingly feeling.
It's also buffering hydrogen when a muscle is fatigued, so you have less of the acid burn, right?
It changes the pH.
So, we commonly see beta alanine.
Beta alanine combines with histadine, which is usually in the body to form carnosine.
Now, again, we get carnosine from me, but not inadequate amounts to get our tissue levels very high.
So, when we have beta alanine, we kind of increase our carnosine levels.
But you can take straight up carnosine too, which is going to have possibly an even bigger effect
when it comes down to detoxifying and having that effect on the brain.
So with carnosine, you probably want to be in the ballpark of 2 to 4 g, possibly even more if you're
looking at the sequestration effect.
The downside is this isn't something where you can just take more of it and have a more profound
effect.
Okay, you're going to urinate it out.
It's more of a cumulative thing.
How can you start taking it consistently, maybe two to six grams per day, let's just say that, and
allow your brain to kind of start sequestering those metals as you need to.
Now, this is where we can get a little more speculative like what else can you potentially do here?
Anything that's going to increase incraanial pressure.
We have what is called the glimpmphatic system in our brain.
The lymphatic system is like the lymphatic system, which moves lymph fluid and detoxifying fluid
throughout our body.
It's very important, but it does not require a heartbeat.
It requires movement and lymphatic flow.
Okay, the it doesn't have a a pulsation, right?
Doesn't have any kind of vortex either.
Like there's speculation on whether it's heartbeating or creating more of a vortices.
It's kind of creating almost this physics-l like state or unique state where basically blood is just
moving through this thing.
It's kind of wild.
Bottom line is the lymph system doesn't have a heartbeat.
It doesn't have something.
So, it requires movement.
The brain has the glimpmphatic system and that is how we actually flush the brain.
And at night when we're sleeping, our brain is literally going through brain washing because the
glimpmphatic system is working, flushing cerebral spinal fluid through our brain.
One of the ways that you can increase this too is obviously exercise.
But sauna, like I talked about, sitting in a high heat sauna where the brain has more incraanial
pressure.
It creates more glimpmphatic flow.
So once you've sequestered more of these heavy metals, the glimpmphatic system has the possibility
of removing them easier.
Okay.
Now the other thing with carnosine is it's also going to block advanced glycation in product
formation.
So it actually has an antioxidant effect within the brain anyway.
So highly effective brain supplement in that case even if you're not looking from the heavy metal
perspective very very powerful for the brain.
Now there's another piece that we have to look at that kind of falls in the same category as say
heavy metals and that's the world of microplastics.
The only evidence we have in being able to kind of get rid of microplastics is high soluble fiber
content.
soluble fiber seems to bind to the nanop particles in plastic and actually allows them to move
through our colon a little bit better.
So that doesn't mean that when we take kind of plastics from the brain that they're going into our
gut and excreting that way.
They're probably going to be excreted in other ways.
But highsoluble fiber at the very least can actually have a sequestration effect on these lipid
based particles that are microplastics and kind of remove them.
So your best chance is with a high soluble fiber diet, high carnosine, sauna use, and of course
intense enough exercise, zone 4, zone 5, where you're creating this good intraanial pressure.
So combining all these things is pretty darn evidencebacked.
I mean, we're going down a couple routes that are a little more speculative and just Thomas Lauer's
opinion, but the carnosine thing is very fascinating.
And I would recommend taking it in the morning or before you work out because you're going to have
benefits from hydrogen ion buffering anyway.
So you're going to be able to get more in the way of before you fatigue, right?
So you could take it before a workout and you're going to buffer some of that acidic buildup.
So you can push a little bit harder in that anorobic range.
So you get a dual benefit there.
It's also an advanced glycation in product blocker.
So you could take it before a sugary meal and potentially block some of the negative effect that
comes there when it comes to DNA damage and sort of potentially weathered skin and stuff like that.
So as always, keep it locked in here.
I'll see you tomorrow.
