Chris, Master John, what would you say the main signs that people can look out for that their
mitochondria is starting to become dysfunctional or failing them in some way?
>> Well, I'll give you 10 signs that you may have seen before, but you probably didn't know were
signs of mitochondrial dysfunction.
So, the first would be uh high cholesterol.
Number two, and this is closely related, would be that you have low thyroid.
Number three would be you have problems with your blood sugar.
That could be either high glucose or low glucose.
Number four and five, fewer and fewer people track.
A lot of people know their blood glucose.
Not a lot of people know their ketones and even fewer people know their lactate.
But for ketones, anything that is really back, if it seems backwards, uh when your ketones don't
make sense, this can be a sign that you have mitochondrial dysfunction.
So, for example, if your ketones are always high, even though you're eating a lot of carbs, that
doesn't really make sense.
If you go on a really strict keto diet and you can't get your ketones up, that doesn't really make
sense.
And the craziest thing of all is if you eat carbs and they make your ketones go up, then your
mitochondria are really messed up.
Um, okay.
So, next would be lactate.
And, uh, not a lot of people track their lactate, especially people who aren't doing it in an
exercise contest uh, context.
But if you wake up in the morning and your lactate is higher than it should be, that's, you know,
cuz you've been sleeping, you shouldn't, you're not stressing your body.
If your lactate is high when you wake up, that's a big sign that your mitochondria are stressed out.
Uh not sleeping well, anxiety, depression, sometimes these are opposites, gut problems, and
autoimmunity.
So we can break into any of those, but those are and you know there are a lot of there's hundreds of
crazy signs where you know a doctor might look at that and say oh that's mitochondrial dysfunction.
But these are kind of 10 things that people are like oh I've seen quite a bit of that.
I didn't realize my mitochondria was related to that.
I think that's a good stepping point for a discussion.
Yeah, man.
I think if we almost like peel this onion back almost literally from the outside in like you're
looking okay when you start with these mitochondrial issues.
Does this show up in the skin for people like right like cuz you have mitochondria in the skin like
people like you look at someone sometimes like you can look across the room and be like that
person's not healthy even if they are physically fit from a body composition perspective right they
just they don't they have that gray look like does it sometimes show up?
Yeah, absolutely.
And I I I think that we could put a perspective on this by saying if you want to be super specific
in what you're looking out for, it's when multiple things in different parts of your body out of
these signs are lining up where you really know that your mitochondria are the thing you need to
work on.
But on the total flip side of that, the mitochondria is kind of the elephant in the room in the
sense that we know it's relevant.
We know everyone needs to be paying attention to their mitochondria.
And you brought up skin.
And a great way that that connects is that everybody's skin starts to look worse over time during
aging.
And one of the things that we know about aging is that your mitochondrial function goes down 1% per
year.
So that if you measure it at 18 20 years old and then you measure it again at 70 years old you've
basically cut your ability to produce cellular energy in half by that time and that is a very strong
driver of the aging process.
So in skin what's happening is your mitochondria are responsible for fueling they extract usable
energy from food and they fuel the production of everything in your body.
They fuel the maintenance of everything in your body.
the repair of everything in your body and the distribution of everything in your body.
So, distribution-wise, you might be eating vitamin C, but it's not getting to your skin in in the in
the right amounts and therefore it's not protecting your skin from uh oxidative damage that you
experience from sunlight pollutants and and other things like that.
Um, and on the production, maintenance and repair side, you have to produce the proteins in your
skin that that make it up.
And as the collagen gets damaged, you need to replace that collagen.
So you're you're trying to maintain it.
If it gets damaged, you're trying to repair it.
If you fail that point, you need to reproduce it.
And all of those things are requiring the energy that your mitochondria produce to fuel those
processes.
And so, yeah, if someone is young and looks super fit and their skin looks kind of old, that could
be a sign that their that their mitochondria are failing them.
Um but you also you know that mitochondrial function is the limiter that you face during the aging
process and is why your skin you know even if you've got the best skin in the world 30 years later
it's going to look different and that is largely explainable by the fact that your mitochondrial
function is declining in time it doesn't have you're not producing the same amount of energy to fuel
those processes.
Now, we can definitely I want to come back to things that are more like signs and like the the
negative lens of this stuff, but I want to give people hope for a minute because like mitochondria,
they don't have an extraordinarily long lifespan, right?
Like the half-life of them, like you can essentially turn them over.
So, these are things that you can over time change, right?
Like even if you are in a dysfunctional state.
>> Yeah.
Well, I you go back to that statistic about 1% loss per year.
The other way I like to spin that to look at the positive side of it is that the spread across that
line is is 75%.
>> So you're looking at a you're looking when you take the population average you're looking at a
straight line down but the spread across that is you know that's explaining 25 age explains 25% of
your mitochondrial function at any given age.
So like if you are 30 and your mitochondrial function is uh X um the fact that you're 30 explains
25% of that and the other 75% is explained by other things such as what did you do with your diet,
your lifestyle, um and your attempts to improve your mitochondrial function.
And so the way that I think about that is that that means that most of this is in our agency to
improve.
Um, and we are going to always fight a a downhill force with time.
There's not been anyone yet that's, you know, that has not aged.
Um, but, you know, there but way more of what's happening during that time span is in our power than
is not.
What would you say just lowhanging fruit, the most powerful lever that someone over 30 could pull to
start getting a grip on their mitochondrial function?
I think the top highlevel strategies are number one, get your nutrients straight.
Most people are walking around with at least suboptimal status of at least one vitamin or mineral.
um about a third have pretty substantial deficits that are um that we can see evidence of in blood
work.
And about five or 6% of people are walking around with multiple nutritional deficiencies.
And your mitochondria require all of the essential nutrients in order to do what they do.
Those nutrients build up the mitochondrial engines that are the energy producing infrastructure um
that allow you to extract usable energy from food.
And so if you're missing any of those nutrients, uh that is going to be a big limiter in your
mitochondrial function.
Uh number two, I would say you want to synchronize your wake sleep cycle with the natural rhythm of
sunlight.
And so that encapsulates a number of tactical strategies within it.
But that means things like uh you should get morning sunlight when you wake up.
You should not be exposed to artificial lights at night.
And during the daytime, you want as closely as possible to be experiencing the natural rhythm of the
of the sun cycle.
So the sun changes how much red light versus blue light is in it during the course of the day for
example and that blue light is going to gradually increase and it's going to gradually go back down.
We have studies that are pretty compelling that you cannot replace just being outdoors in the sun.
For example, people the for children, the more time they spend outdoors, the lower their risk of
myopia, needing glasses.
And there have been a number of elegant studies in China where they actually they randomized schools
to different policies of how much outdoor time that the kids got and they saw the drop in kids who
needed glasses.
So, we have pretty good evidence that being get experiencing a lot of natural sunlight causes you to
not need glasses uh at least during development.
But that that's just sort of an example of how it's not it's not just morning sunlight.
It's not just blue blocking at night.
It really is being as in sync with that light cycle as possible.
And that also implies that you get good sleep.
And you could be missing other things.
A mitochondrial function is needed for sleep.
So you could be missing a nutrient that is hurting your mitochondrial ability to fuel the sleep
process.
But you know when you're following all the strategies, you you should f feel your sleep fall into
place with that cycle.
I want you to consider trying something that really worked well for me, especially a few years ago.
See, I'm not a big probiotic fan usually because what happens is they just get degraded by your gut
anyway.
So the moment that they really hit your stomach, they're getting broken down and it's practically
useless.
But these guys actually publish clinical trials and they do their own research, which is legit.
Okay, this is a company called Seed and this is their DS1.
So it's a symbiotic, which means it has a prebiotic and a probiotic in one capsule.
So if you look closely inside these capsules, there is actually a capsule inside of this capsule.
So that means that when it goes into your system, the first one breaks down with the prebiotic and
then that next capsule goes for a little ride and it potentially colonizes into your lower
intestinal tract into your colon which is where we actually want the bacteria to go in the first
place.
So it has this proper staging which is some of the literature that they've published themselves.
So one of the things that I respect about them is that they aren't afraid to publish their own
trials even if they don't always work in their favor.
They're just legit and transparent.
And I think this day and age, transparency is super important.
So that link down below is for 20% off from Seed.
So again, it's for this DS1, which is quite literally the only probiotic I've ever recommended on
this channel because it's the only probiotic that I've ever noticed personally work.
So that link is down below.
It's in the top line of the description, and it works for so many different things if you're just
trying to establish a healthier lifestyle.
So check them out after this video.
A third strategy I would say would be creatine.
Optimize your creatine status.
If mitochondria are the powerhouse of the cell that are producing the energy, creatine is the
mitochondrial energy grid that spreads the energy to the rest of the cell.
Um, and I don't think everyone needs to supplement with creatine, but when I try to figure out like
who needs creatine and who doesn't, the data suggests that people who don't eat 1 to two pounds of
meat per day need some creatine supplemented.
And most people aren't eating 1 to two pounds of meat per day, you know.
So, someone on the lion diet might be eating that um, but most people aren't.
And so I think if the reason you see in creatine is the trends are interesting like we for a long
time the only studies that were ever done were done in an athletic context.
But when we looked at what does creatine do we see it powering sperm to swim up the vaginal canal.
We see it producing stomach acid.
We see it mediating vision vision.
Um we see it everywhere.
And if you asked someone in exercise like 10 15 years ago, they they would have been shocked at how
the studies on creatine are just always positive.
It's like every time it's studied for something, does it good?
But it was mostly an exercise context.
Now they're breaking it out and they're saying, "Well, can we highdose creatine and see if it
improves healing after traumatic brain injury?
Can we highdose creatine in a single night and see if it uh prevents people's ability to do high-
powered cognitive tests um at 3 in the morning and not complain about being tired and you know the
more things it's studied for it just keeps coming back as beneficial and I think that's because it
is the mediator of spreading the mitochondrial energy through um the rest of the cell through the
rest of the And most people aren't getting enough because most people aren't eating, you know, 2 lbs
of rare steak a day.
>> Do you think that creatine I mean, we can go forever on this, but one question that I think that
you would be a good person to ask, >> is it non- selective?
Like, okay, for example, the only downside I've ever had with creatine is that like if my cognitive
load is super high, it seems as though creatine is helping me there.
It's almost like it's knows where to go, right?
I mean, but then so much to the point where I have so much brain power, I'm requiring less sleep,
literally requiring less sleep and then my body takes a slight toll on that side.
But if I'm using it almost for like, hey, my focus is a little less cognitive demand and more
physical.
It doesn't seem it's almost like am I willing that into existence?
It's so wild.
I don't know if you've seen that before.
>> Do you h are you cycling it or are you or are you like using it acutely at a high dose?
How are you discovering this pattern?
>> Uh, I will occasionally use it acutely for sure.
So, like if I know I'm going to have on a >> day-to-day basis, you basis 5 to 10 grams.
Nothing crazy.
Uh, if I am sleep deprived or if I have a higher cognitive load, like I'm doing a lot of filming
that week, I will bump it up to 15 to 20.
>> Okay.
And it's definitely during it is that upper you know above 10 12 grams that I actually notice I
sleep like I I my sleep scores I try not to like muddy the water too much with that.
I try to go on my subjective sleep score as much as I can.
How do I actually feel the next day and it's almost as though my brain will feel extremely recovered
even if I got five six hours of sleep but it's like I still just got five six hours of sleep.
So it's like my body feels like it takes a little bit of that hole.
But if I drop drop drop it down below like 10 grams, I find I mean maybe I'm just titrating the dose
and finding that I'm a hyper respponder or something.
>> Yeah.
I think first of all your experiences are confounded by the fact that you are only using the
creatine at those do at those doses when you feel you need it.
And so the background context for why you needed the creatine is different.
Um, and I think it would be hard to like definitively separate that out without randomizing your,
you know, one of your friends to randomize you to a creatine or a placebo like in those contexts
where you would want it.
>> Maybe I'll do that.
>> But with that, but with that said, um, I can speculate.
And so I think that if you feel better then that you know that is a sign that creatine is decreasing
your need for sleep which makes complete sense because the one of the most important reasons that
you sleep is to make up the energy deficit from the day before.
Um, and I think this is certainly an a need for deep This certainly explains the need for deep
sleep.
So, what's happening is your mitochondria need a rest and you need a rest.
You rest more than your mitochondria do.
So, they get a break.
You get a really deep, deep, deep break.
and your mitochondria are producing less energy, but because your metabolic demand has gone down so
much, you have an excess of what they're producing and you restore what you used in the last day.
And so that sleep debt is your brain running out of energy.
And the restorative effect of sleep is to refill the energy supply.
But creatine is what it's doing is it's extending the energy supply.
It's making the energy more effectively delivered to the places that need it and in doing so it uh
it it is lowering the demand to restore that energy.
Right?
Okay.
So you know therefore that is why you sleep less but you feel better.
I think that absent a randomized experiment, another thing that would be interesting to see would be
what is the effect of just doing that proactively over a long period of time because what you're
doing is you're using it till until you feel like you need don't need it anymore and going back to
your maintenance dose.
I wonder, I'm not telling you to do this, but I wonder what would happen if you brought it up to 20
grams and kept it there.
>> You know, two months later, are you going to start feeling fatigued because you weren't sleeping?
Like, that's you may never know the answer to that because you don't care enough to do that and
going back to your your baseline creatine intake always restores you back to normal and you go back
to the equilibrium.
So, it doesn't really matter.
But if you were really trying to like tease out the the causation and what's actually happening,
that would be an interesting observational experiment because it would just tell you of whether
there's a problem with the with the decreased sleep or not, you know.
So, I really do think that like in general, sleeping more is usually a good thing, but I I totally
agree with what what you you phrased it as you track your subjective sense of whether you're rested
enough.
I rate my energy on a scale of one to five every day and I log it in a spreadsheet.
I have the definitions of what a one to five looks like.
So, I never think too much about it.
I just do it every day.
Um, I have been getting better and better sleep over the last 3 years since I started rigorously
tracking it and my energy is improving and so I'm convinced that the better sleep is good for me.
Um, but if I were to see myself sleeping more and to be more tired in the day, you know, that's a
sign that it's not I'm not getting better restorative sleep.
It's like the the demand for it is going up, right?
And it could be happening in the background, right?
>> Yeah.
So, I so I do think like I've got an Aurora ring.
I got a Gen Two cuz I hate the little green lights on the Gen 3 and up.
But, um, >> my son calls it the frog.
>> But, you know, but I but I have I have rigorous sleep data and I think it's I think it's super
useful.
But I do think that I I published an article called your north star the other day and one one of the
one of the ideas in there is that your north star isn't that you're sleeping eight hours a day.
Your north star is that you feel like you have the energy to to fulfill all your physical and
cognitive demands and to recover from them and to do so with a feeling of abundant energy, low
anxiety and high life force which for many people manifests as a high libido during those years but
has other manifestations as well.
Um, and so that's sleep is a tool to get there.
Like sleep is a tool to mediate the recovery from fulfilling those uh physical and cognitive
pursuits, getting the rest you need and recovering.
But the real evidence that you like when you're tracking your sleep, hours sleep or REM sleep or
deep sleep, you're tracking a mechanism between those two things.
you're tracking a tool that you need to use to get from I fulfilled my goals to I'm recovered and I
can do it again.
And so the evidence that you want to be looking at isn't the mediator, it's the result.
It's I did fulfill my physical I, you know, I did increase my weight this week in the gym.
I did finish that paper I was working on.
Um, and I do feel ready to to get out there and do it again.
Um, and I think it's super important not to get lost in proxy markers and mediators because you can
be because I, you know, I could look just at my sleep data and say, "Oh, I'm getting an average of 7
hours and 45 minutes this year.
Last year I only got 7 hours and 15 minutes.
I'm doing great." Well, for me that is true, but it's also true that I'm getting more done and I'm
feeling more recovered and feeling better at it.
And that's the real thing that you want to be looking at.
Um, so you know, but I interestingly because this coming back to the creatine, I found that up to
eight grams, every gram of creatine that I got added 6 minutes to my total sleep.
>> It was in it was insane how it was insane how linear it was.
But the reason I did this experiment was I went on a loading dose and my sleep gained an hour and a
half.
I was getting an average of 7 hours of sleep and I went on I did 20 grams of creatine a day out of
nowhere.
Um, you know, standard athletic loading uh loading protocol >> for how long?
>> For um well, you're supposed to do it four or five days.
Um, but then I was like, well, let me do it two or three more days because this is good, you know.
Um, so I did it for seven or eight days, but when I went back down to the maintenance dose of of
five grams, um, my sleep wound up in the middle.
And so I was like, huh, let me figure out what's the what's the quantitative relationship to it.
And what happened was when I worked my, you know, work back up, uh, slowly from 5 to 6 to 7 to 8,
um, I was getting an a linear like it was, it was crazy how straight the line was.
But it was literally it was 6 minutes extra total sleep repeatable over the course of several weeks.
I'm talking about I'm not saying like I I did six minutes and I saw my sleep one day.
I'm saying I I stayed on six grams until my sleep was not changing and I and you know the average
was six minutes higher then I went to seven grams and I stayed on it until my sleep was stabilized
and the average was was 12 minutes from from up from five you know >> so not everyone has that
experience but that's an example for me where I was fixing the distribution of my mitochondrial
energy metabolism it was enabling better sleep there are other people get insomnia from creatine.
And they don't say what you said that, you know, they don't say, "I do it when I need more and it
makes me feel great and I go back and and and you know, I think I got a little bit less sleep
because I didn't need it." They say, "Oh, every time I go on creatine, I get insomnia.
I feel like crap because I'm not sleeping." And there are known mechanisms why that would happen.
So creatine will hurt your synthesis of glycine.
And glycine helps sleep because it's a calming neurotransmitter.
It lowers your core body temperature.
We know this because there's studies showing that that three grams of glycine before sleep will
decrease sleep latency.
People get to sleep faster.
Uh they get better sleep.
They feel more rested.
Uh there's another study with with collagen that is a source of glycine.
It's the best source of glycine as a as a whole protein.
Um, and the collagen study, I think this is I think this is actually probably a real difference
between collagen and glycine because the collagen digests more slowly.
But the the decreased sleep latency is found with glycine and collagen uh shows decreased waking up
in the middle of the night >> and I think that's because the distribution of glycine keeps up.
But so yeah, so I have a I actually have a a guide called uh handling creatine side effects on my
site and all the side effects in it are side effects that the that the creatine promoters say don't
exist because they never show up in the trials.
But there's a long tale of internet comments.
>> Yeah.
>> And man, they came out of the woodwork like two years ago when I published an article on why
everyone should optimize their creatine.
Yeah.
>> Those people came out of the woodwork and I had many dozens of comments.
all it was blowing up my socials saying well how come when I get it I get angry how come when I take
it I can't sleep how come when I take it I get restless leg syndrome how come when I take it I get
bloated how come when I take it I get twitching you know and so I tallied all these up and I came up
with a with a you know what do we know about the physiology of what it should do and and what does
that mean for the side effects but I to be honest I think those people that's just a sign that they
need more creatine um and I'm not saying that like it's like oh you got to power through it and
detox your way through it do think you need to like cut back the dose.
Um, adjust some of the synergistic factors like creatine can increase your need for electrolytes,
can increase your need for glycine.
Um, so I think working your way through it and I and I actually I have a a guy who I have a
mitochondrial test called Maidome and I have a an early customer who took it and it showed that he
had a deficit of methylation.
not he had MTHFR, but he had a deficit of be of being able to transport methyl groups from the
methylation process into his mitochondria.
And those are needed to produce the the proteins that make up the infrastructure of energy
production.
And he actually had to micro dose creatine at 100 milligrams a day for 3 months before he could get
his dose up to normal.
But man, he feels like a new person on on the other end.
and he had some catastrophic drug withdrawal induced mitochondrial dysfunction.
Um he lost 17 pounds of muscle and he gained it all back in a year.
>> Wow.
>> Um and you know he I mean he gained it back as quick as he lost it which is kind of hard.
You know it's not like it's not an extraordinary claim like someone who never lost the muscle and
they gained 17 pounds a year.
That's an extraordinary claim.
this is this is believable and I and I know and I trust him and I and he's given me the data so I
know it's true but uh but still it's pretty impressive to re you know to have a to feel like you
lost your life and then to feel getting back to normal within 6 weeks fully back to normal in 6
months and at the one year mark to say I completely regained all the muscle I lost and now I can do
everything I could do before >> is pretty remarkable and I think that is I'm coni, it's anecdotal,
but I'm convinced from his story that micro doing the creatine when he couldn't tolerate it was a
vehicle to get up to the to the sort of normal dose that a healthy person can tolerate.
>> Yeah, I'm I I think there is a case to be made for for micro doing and kind of building yourself
up.
And it's interesting because with the sleep thing like if you look at even the here's some of the
rodent model research on like par and like in like a fasted state when par is elevated it's
increasing wakefulness on like less sleep for it was only obviously you've seen it in rodents but I
had postulated that that was like occurring with myself for a long time right when I would go deep
into a fasted state or deep ketogenic state where I know people are being elevated and I'm my need
for sleep would go down And I used to chalk it up as like, oh, like, you know, maybe there's, excuse
me, more adrenaline, more, you know, whatever.
Like, maybe I'm not actually getting the sleep that I need.
But I was finding that deep in a ketogenic state, I was simply requiring less sleep.
It was confirmable across all my data and most importantly, my subjective energy.
Um, which is super interesting.
And the only thing that I could ever find there is like kind of somewhat dodgy rodent data on it.
But it was still like, okay, it kind of makes sense where there's going to be people where that
increase in wakefulness, that change in erection or whatever is happening is actually disturbing
them, right?
But then there's people that maybe their mitochondria are so clicked on and actually efficient that
it's manifesting as this, hey, you just simply need less sleep.
But I could see if someone was mitochond mitochondrially dysfunctional and that happened, you're
just kind of limiting the amount of mitochondria that can function well the next day.
Does that make sense?
>> It makes sense.
I but I think there are two things going on.
And so I I think one thing to note here is that creatine is not a drug.
And I think that we get a lot of our conceptualization from pharma where they're using something
that is not supposed to be in the body.
And so everything about it is a trade-off.
It's like you're you're creating a new effect that the body doesn't know how to deal with when you
put a drug into the system.
And that can have intended unintended consequences and unintended consequences.
And if you're going to like if you're put if you're putting a benzoazipene into the system, you're
turning down the en the sort of energetic tone of the brain.
And so you do get less anxiety, but you also get people who have like driving difficulties and
they're kind of tired and they and you know you all the side effects you start to see with just like
that's what happens when you decrease the energetic tone of the brain too much.
But creatine is not a drug and so it's not it shouldn't have that type of tradeoff where it's like
it made you more wakeful because it increased the energetic like it's not like it's not like
caffeine and caffeine is a drug and it's it is counteracting the sleepiness signal that in your
brain and so it's making you feel more more more wakeful.
Um and it and that will inter that will interfere with your sleep especially if you take it at
night.
Creatine is not doing any of that.
It is um it's fundamentally extending the energy supply.
But the reason it has downsides associated with like decreased glycine synthesis um is I think it's
really because you're fixing the problem too fast and what happens is the main reason so for the
process of methylation people know this from B vitamins MTHFR methylolate all that stuff 45% of that
is used to synthesize uh to synthesize size creatine, you use glycine as a buffer for having too
many methyl groups.
So like if you eat a steak and you have a bunch of the amino acid methionine, which is the building
block of the methylation process, there's going to be an hour or two after you ate the steak where
you have more methyl groups than you need.
You don't need to synthesize creatine right now.
And so you you want to try to store those for later.
and glycine comes in and absorbs them.
It it tries to hold on to them for after like a few hours from now when you didn't just eat the
steak and now you do need them and release them.
But if if you just if you blast too many methyl groups in there and the and the glycine can't hold
on to them, it washes out in the urine.
Okay?
So if you because glycine is there to use up those extra methyl groups, now you add creatine to the
system.
Now 45% of your methylation was used for the creatine.
now you don't need it.
>> What are you going to do?
Well, now you have all these extra methyl groups and the and the glycine mops them up.
It winds up in the urine and so on.
>> So, because of that, your real problem is that you just you you put the creatine in the system
really fast and you didn't give your your body time to adjust.
And I think that's the kind of thing that you see with the the per the anecdote I gave you before
where micro doing the creatine for a few months made him be able to tolerate normal doses.
But I to to answer your question, I think that the right lens when using something that just isn't a
drug is that if you see a tradeoff, it's not really a trade-off.
It's really a combination of more than one possible effect.
So I think that creatine can increase your sleep when mitochondrial energy extension was the
limiting factor for you to be able to sleep it.
and then you will feel more rested.
It can decrease your need for sleep when you didn't have an energy limiting factor for your sleep.
You're just sleeping to get the energy restoration now you don't need it.
If creatine is decreasing someone's sleep and they feel less rested as a result and they're saying,
"Damn, I really need more sleep and I can't get it." >> I don't think that's just like turn it's not
like caffeine's just just turning up the energetic tone.
it's causing a problem that it shouldn't cause.
And I think 99.999% of those are because you went 20, 30, 40 years without fixing that problem, then
you fixed it all at once and your body, you didn't give your body a chance to adjust.
>> Yeah.
Well, like you mentioned, I mean, it's confounded by like if I meggose creatine on days with high
cognitive load, what are the other things?
I'm indoors more, right?
So like that's probably screwing me up, right?
I have cognitive load so maybe there's a level of you know just the brain is just on right it's just
like so I think to your point at the beginning it's like it's hard to isolate like if I was to say
hey I'm on vacation and not working and I were to just jack that dose up would it have the same
effect right like if because I'm using it at those peak doses when there is more demand maybe the
question becomes more about like am I jacking myself up with all these other things that I'm having
to do right it's less more it's kind of reverse causation in a way.
It's more so the fact that >> I'm in fluorescent lights filming with cognitive, you know, which is a
great segue.
I want because I want to do almost another topic on creatine that we could do because I think we
could go forever on it because you you mentioned, you know, we're talking about light.
I'm curious about the flicker as well as like LED, right?
We're talking about things that are exhausting to and energy, right?
Energy exhausting to the mitochondria.
So obviously there's the absence of being outside which is not good.
But what about lights themselves and what about the flicker?
Like how is that impacting our mitochondria, our energy?
I' I've had like when I walk into like a Target and there's I feel drained.
I mean not that the soul's like not getting sucked out of me by being in Target in the first place,
but the actual lights like something is happening.
>> Yeah.
So I said before that we want to sync our sleep wake cycle to the natural light rhythm of the day.
I think a lot of the problems are with the degree to which the light deviates from what we are
designed to experience from nature.
And um I'm I'm uh I'm working on an article called the five laws of mitochondrial health.
And the first law of mitochondrial health is always think about your mitochondria first.
Second law is put food first and pharma last.
The third law is never put tech before nature.
And this is not anti-tech and it's not slavish obser subservience to nature, but it it makes you ask
the question, am I supposed to be receiving from technology?
Am I supposed to be receiving that stimulus from a natural source?
And is this technology helping me receive that better or is it getting in the way of receiving what
I need to receive from nature?
I think you can make an argument that a lot of exercise equipment enables you to access the gravity
and intermolecular forces that you know make physical feats of strength or speed or agility or
endurance more accessible to you.
But the light is is very different.
So in the morning we wake up and the sunlight is doing several things.
One is there's a small percentage of that sunlight that is blue light but it's very substantial and
physiologically relevant.
It's the signal that goes into your eyes and tells your brain that it's daytime.
And in your brain when you wake up you like so sleep was a rest for your mitochondria and a bigger
rest for you and you recuperated the energy that you use during the day.
When you wake up you are in a state of relative hypoxia.
You're in a state of relative mitochondrial dysfunction.
What I mean by that is you have suddenly imposed the demands of wakefulness on your body.
The amount of energy that you're that you're spending to get out of bed and walk over to the coffee
pot is a tremendous amount of energy compared to what you were spending when you were in deep sleep.
And the mitochondria have to wake up themselves and they have to readjust how they're doing things
to adapt to the demands of wakefulness.
And we evolved under the context where waking up meant being exposed to the sunlight that had that
blue light that tells our brain that it's daytime.
And what that light is doing in your brain is it's activating serotonin to be produced and to come
out.
People think that serotonin is about a happy chemical or mood or it's it's not about that.
It's about adjusting.
It's about helping the mitochondria to adjust to increase demands or to uh strangled supply.
So, if you were um drowning or you were strangled or you're exercising, you're going to get
increases in serotonin that are trying to deal uh put exercise out of there.
Um, think about getting strangled or holding your breath too long or or drowning.
Those are situations of acute hypoxia and serotonin is going to mediate your mitochondrial
adjustment to that.
When you wake up in the morning or when you exercise, those are periods of increased demand placed
on the mitochondria.
The mitochondria have to adapt to them and and serotonin is mediating that adaptation in the brain.
The other thing though is that we know that too much blue light and not enough red light is
devastating for the mitochondria.
So you're not waking up to just blue light, you're waking up to like 10 15% blue light and like 50%
red light.
Um, so about if you spend 10 to 20 minutes in front of a red and infrared light panel, that's like
spending the first 30 to 90 minutes of your day in the sun.
And the third law of mitochondrial health, my third law of mitochondrial health, it doesn't say
don't get the red light panel.
Doesn't say don't get a near infrared panel.
It says, "Don't replace the morning sunlight that you need to have with these technological
solutions.
You can add to them once you've established your natural pattern, but you don't use them as
substitutes for that natural pattern because there's things in the sunlight that are not going to be
replicated in a biohacking device.
That is biohacking devices are like are like supplements.
Supplements are called supplements because they supplement a good diet.
They're not called nutritional replacements.
Um, and you biohacking devices are supplements.
And in exactly the same way, if I take a multivitamin, in theory, it's balanced, but it's not as
balanced as as food because there's just things that aren't in there.
Same same thing if you know I take a lowowered laser and and set it to a specific wavelength.
you're that's like taking one vitamin and you know they you could they could come out you could you
could say well I'll put the red and near infrared uh panel on I'll get I'll sit in a far infrared
sauna but open myself up to the panel and then I'll put um you know full spectrum lights on you know
that's your multivitamin but it's not the same multivitamin is not the same as food and so I'm not
not I'm there's no part of me that's saying like do not experiment with these devices I I have them
and I use them.
But what I'm absolutely saying emphatically is these are not replacements for sunlight.
So we can get worse than but but here's go back to the children spending time outdoors is a direct
driver of whether they need glasses.
you know what that's I think the lesson from that is there's stimuli from the like if you spend two
hours of your afternoon outdoors there's stimuli that you're getting for that and the dermatologists
will say no you and you know Brian Johnson will say um well Brian Johnson I think would go outside
but he he would have an umbrella um the dermatologists you know they they're concerned about
photoagging that's that's a real concern I don't think you want to go out in the middle of the day
and get burned but you need to go out in the middle of of the day with some unprotected sun
exposure.
You don't need to turn even turn pink, but to get your vitamin D.
But I think what what those studies with outside children are showing is that you really want to
spend as much time as possible in indirect sunlight.
You don't want to be baking in ultraviolet light.
That will photo you.
But if you're inside, can you design your building so that you don't need to turn the lights on
because the natural light from the window is providing you with what you need?
There are problems with windows.
Windows are getting worse because as they get more energy efficient, they're letting less infrared
light in.
Um, so you want old windows um if if you need the windows.
Uh but you know it's but it's way better to get even the modern energetically efficient window that
hates your mitochondria.
It's way better to get that than um than these lights.
Um because and you know and there's I'm not saying don't use artificial lighting.
I'm saying that when you have the choice always opt for the natural lighting because it's it's doing
things for your mitochondria, for your eyes, for your brain that you just cannot uh accomplish with
an artificial light.
And then when you what when you get into the the LEDs, your first problem is that you've narrowed
the spectrum even further to exactly what's harmful.
You know, like you've you've like you've looked at like what do all these wave lengths do?
Oh, I'll pick the one that destroys your mitochondria unless it's balanced with the others.
And then what will I do?
I will cut the others out, you know.
Um, and then you know, and then you flicker it and now now you're just it's like when you go out in
the sun, the way the sun does it is is great.
Like props to the sun, right?
Because the sun doesn't just be like, "Oh, it's 10:00 a.m.
now.
Let's double the blue light." The the sunlight just changes very gradually over the day.
It's very continuous.
And that continuity is dynamic, but it's but it's smooth.
and that the rhythmicity and the smoothness of that rhythm is a natural exposure that we're meant to
have and a and a flickering LED is sort of like the precise opposite of it.
So, I think flickering LEDs are are, you know, in devastating catastrophic violation of the third
law of mitochondrial health because they're I mean, they allow you to see, right?
So, you can fool yourself and you can be like, "Oh, well, this is the same thing as the sun because
I can see what I'm doing." Um, but you only have to peel back like one small layer deeper to see
that you have obliterated the natural exposures that your body is designed to have through this
technology that crept its way in because it it tricked you by saying, "Oh, I can help you see too,
but now you can be wherever you want." Where do you stand on some of like Gerald Pollock's old work,
you know, with the exclusion zone and kind of the the mitochondria in that capacity?
Because I've I find it fascinating.
I mean, um I'm I buy into it quite frankly.
Um and maybe just a little explanation of of what that is because I feel like I think it was, you
know, years ago when I first saw that how it changed how I look at the mitochondria.
It really did.
really changed from my perspective of being, you know, a low carb guy that really looked at it
pretty simply with macronutrients and and energy production and it like blasted me open into a whole
different way in that I look at the mitochondria all for the better, right?
But I'm just kind of curious like where you stand with that.
Um, well, I I feel like this is uh explaining uh Pollock's work without Pollock here uh feels like
um uh tough shoes to fill, but um I so my favorite Gerald Pollock story is I'm a I'm a snowboarder
and um I got a I got a Travis R.
Travis Rice is like a um outback snowboarder pro.
So I buy his movie.
He's got a movie called The Fourth Phase.
I'm like, "Ah, that's a weird coincidence." >> So, I turn on the movie and the the the theme of the
movie was he he said the the snowflake that falls in his favorite place, his favorite mountain.
Where did the drop of water come from?
And he traces the hydraological cycle and he goes to a fire burning ceremony in Japan cuz the ash
went into the air and it helped form the snowflake and whatever.
But anyway, I start this movie and Gerald Pollock is there talking about the fourth phase of water
and I'm like, "Wow, that's what a meeting of minds." But um anyway, you know, I think uh I I love
Pollock's work.
I think I think it's revolutionary.
I think he has a little bit of of a a little bit of a of persecution complex flavor in his work
because, you know, you read his work and it sounds like um there's no one in molecular biology who
believes that cellular water is primarily in a gel-like state.
Uh but for the last like two editions of the Albert's book, which is the bible of cellular and
molecular biology, it's called molecular biology of a cell.
their discussion of the sodium potassium pump.
Uh it it talks about how the sodium potassium pump uses energy to um take uh to pump sodium out out
of the cell and bring potassium into the cell.
And Ling follows um in a in a a tradition that's sort of like, oh, there's not enough energy for the
sodium potassium.
Oh, excuse me.
uh Pollock follows in the tradition of Gilbert Ling um who was kind of questioned the relevancy of
all these uh receptors and pumps in the cell membrane um and they're the the big story is the cell
waters in a gel-like state.
So in molecular biology of the cell, the discussion of the sodium potassium pump ends by saying,
"Nevertheless, the sodium potassium pump is is probably only making a small contribution to the
electrolyte balance because most water in the cell is in a gel-like state.
Um, so I do, you know, I think that uh certainly most people who learn molecular biology are kind of
thinking of cells as uh amorphous sacks of water.
Yeah.
And that's definitely not true.
And you can see it permeate all kinds of of science like especially in pharmarmacology because in
pharmarmacology they use all these assumptions that say that like whatever compartment they're
looking at is homogeneous.
But if the cell is in if the water inside the cell is in a gel-like state, there's no reason why it
would be homogeneous.
Like there's no reason to think that you can homogen like in science you would homogenize the tissue
and you would say the concentration of the thing is such and such.
But if the cell is in a gel-like state or largely in a gel-like state, there's like no basis for the
assumption that when you homogenize the tissue, you you're looking at a a homogeneous just like all
the sodium is at such and such concentration.
So it is it it does kind of throw a wrench in the wheels of a lot of of assumptions.
you know, even though it's admitted in a in a a line in the textbook, um it hasn't permeated all the
assumptions, but um I mean, basically the the idea is that water is structured and there is an
interplay between mitochondrial energy production and the structuring of water and the structuring
of water and mitochondrial energy production.
they need each other and they support each other.
And that struct that um that structuring can take different forms in the cell.
It might mean that most of the cell water is in a gelic state, although it's not necessarily all the
same.
Outside of the cell where the blood is flowing, my understanding of of Pollock's uh argument is that
the edge of the blood vessel has a very thin gel-like layer.
but that it's not homogeneous longitudinally and that um and I think the most fascinating uh so one
of the more regular implications of what he's done is I think it it plays into a lot of why does red
light benefit your mitochondria >> and the science is you know some of the science says that the
wavelengths are actually kind of used like food energy but there's other science that says that it
optimizes the viscosity of the structured water around the mitochondrial engines to make them run
more effectively.
But the most fascinating uh Pollock paper was from I think it was last year and he was trying to
answer the age-old question of why does the blood keep flowing when someone dies and um this was
this has been observed in ancient Greece uh and so it's been known for thousands of years that the
that the blood keeps flowing after you die for quite a while.
Um, and what it what he's really showing explains a a portion of Venus return.
So, the heart pumps blood.
Some people dispute pump, but any the heart is responsible for sending blood out.
But the power it exerts in sending the blood out completely dissipates by the time the blood has to
return in the veins to the heart.
>> And so modern medicine says that movement is the primary impetus of Venus return.
And that's why if you're in the hospital for more than a few days, they'll start injecting you with
hepin because they're worried that bed rest will will uh give you a DVT, a deep venous thrombosis
from from the Venus return not not working.
Um, the alternative or supplement to that will be uh compression gear where they've got the uh
compression machine on the end of the bed and they wrap your calves in the comp compression gear and
that's to try to squeeze the calves to make the the the blood go back.
Um, this is something we can talk about later.
I do think there's something to being upside down that helps with Venus return.
>> Well, especially I mean if you start Yeah.
I mean the heart as like a vortices versus a pump and like then that then that all kind of makes
which is a separate discussion for another day probably like uh but but anyway so Pollock's paper
was basically showing that mitochondrial metabolism produces mid infrared light that structures the
water on the very edge of the lumen of the blood vessel.
So like basically you've got the endothelium which is the innermost layer and like inside that
you've got this structured water but that the path back to the heart has a gradient of solutes that
attracts the water longitudinally and that that is a major mechanism of venus return.
And that doesn't um negate any of the others, but but it's fascinating because what it means is that
there's there are many mechanisms of Venus return and and part of and it can be gravity if you're
upside down, it can be movement, it can be compression.
Um but infrared light produced by your own metabolism is part of that.
And that gave me the insight that cuddling might be an very important longevity strategy because um
I suppose if you're maximally but I mean everyone gets less healthy as they go get closer to death,
right?
But if you're maximally healthy, you're you're producing abundant mid- infrared energy yourself.
Um you know, but if but you lose it very easily.
Um, and if uh you it dissipates as heat, but if you've you know if if you're cuddling with someone
um you each of you could be kind of low in the energy production, but you're the contact is is
causing you to recuperate it really fast.
Um so you could probably get like a big percentage increase in the total mid- infrared metabolic
energy that you're exposed to in those circumstances.
>> Interesting.
Wonder if that applies to cuddling with dogs, too.
>> Well, I think it does.
>> Yeah, because all living beings uh make infrared >> interesting.
You get it right on that one.
That one's an interesting one.
>> I think I think there's something there.
I think there's something there for sure.
>> I've tweeted about it, but >> because I feel like I mean that was probably the most eyeopening
aspect of Pollock's work that I as you know just our mitochondria essentially emitting light, right?
Like I mean it's just that in itself and okay well in high concentration or lots of people in one
room or like how how does that you know where do we go from there right is there is there part of
the human connection is that part of it right is one of the reasons why human connection is so
important.
It's not just this energetic mood serotonin thing like maybe there's actually a light aspect to it
as well.
I think there is and I I think that it's if you look at the literature on this though the the
consensus is moving towards um we make ultra weak photon emission they call it >> um and that
there's so there's research going back many many you way way into the early 20th century and and
beyond >> where people were trying to claim that light was produced biologically by us, not by
jellyfish, and that it played a signaling role.
And the scientific consensus is kind of currently at it's hard to detect, but it's definitely there.
It spans all the wavelengths, but but it's hard to make a case that it's playing a signaling role
because it's not intense enough.
>> Now, the counter there's two counter-arguments to that.
one is that it's not a it doesn't have to be intense.
It could just be coherent.
Um, you know, so you can have a very low intensity signal that is rhythmic and cyclical enough that
it synchronizes activities to it.
That's one argument.
And then the other is we really don't know um how we have really have no idea how much light is
produced inside cells because we have no idea how much light is consumed inside cells, right?
So when they're doing these experiments, they're looking at what does the person admit emit or
looking at what a what does a cell emit?
But there's tons of stuff inside cells that um absorb light and convert it.
So for example there's a a molecule called protoorpherin 9 and protoorpherin 9 is a precursor to
heem and both heem and protoorpherin 9 can absorb blue light but only protoorpherin 9 can emit uh
red light.
It it absorbs blue light and it emits red light.
Now, if it does it on its own, it emits reactive oxygen species.
For every red photon, it for every blue photon, it converts to a red photon.
But there's an enzyme called TSPO.
Um, did I say that right?
Uh, anyway, there's an enzyme that um abs turns it into an antioxidant.
So when prophine 9ine binds to this enzyme in the mitochondrial membrane um it becomes a machine
that can convert blue light to red light and act as an antioxidant.
The way that I came across this was I was trying to find out whether bzzoazipines impact
mitochondrial function and it turns out that clinazipam destroys that process >> and they they found
what they so in 1977 when they discovered the benzoazipene binding site on GABA receptors which is
how what they say is their mechanism of action.
>> Yeah.
The same research group in the same set of pine has nature papers in 1977 found the peripheral
benzoazipene receptor that's expressed all across the body and is in the mitochondria and it's that
thing >> it's that thing clinazipam um excuse me not I I said that wrong dasipam and not clinazipam
dazipam uh really kind of uh catastrophically blocks that process but the point is there's so many
mechanisms to absorb the light.
You have no idea whether what it's emitting is the uh is like quantitatively you know is it is it
90% or is it 0.001% we have no idea.
So those are the the two the coherency and the intracellular quantity are like two things we really
don't understand and I think they and then there's a lot of people that are overly dismissive that
they have a biologically relevant role because they don't understand how they could have a signaling
role at that intensity.
But I'm kind of looking at this and I'm like well just because so and so said 125 years ago that
they have a signaling role, why is that the only biological significance they can have?
You know, at a minimum, if you got a bunch of blue light being produced in the mitochondria under
stress, we know that being blasted by blue light from the LED destroys your mitochondria.
So, that's re biologically relevant.
And if there's a mechanism to convert that to red light, that's biologically relevant, you know.
So, I think there's uh definitely something to this and I and I'm excited about what what the next
20 years turns up on it.
If we go you you mentioned the impact on the thyroid like a relationship between you know a failing
mitochondria and low thyroid curious that direction that mechanism >> um well why does thyroid exist
it's it's signaling I mean in in your mind what what do you think thyroid is meant to signal >>
function you're I mean you're you're you're signaling metabolism And you're signaling you're you're
alive.
You're pro pro energy, right?
>> Yeah.
>> Exactly.
Okay.
So thyroid is basically a if you look at what it does, it just generally ramps up the metabolic
rate.
That's like it's that's the best the best way you can possibly summarize thyroid hormone is it turns
the dial on on energy production.
>> Energy regulator, I guess.
Yeah.
>> Why would it do that?
>> Well, the rational reason to spend more energy is because you have more energy, right?
So thyroid you could you could see as a regulator of um the energetic equivalent of financial
responsibility.
So energetic responsibility is to spend energy that you have or that you can pay back later on a
short time horizon.
To be energetically irresponsible is to spend energy that you don't have and to keep spending it and
to go into more and more energy debt that now you have no hope of ever paying it back and you have
to declare energetic bankruptcy.
Okay?
So thyroid is mediating the distribution of energy according to those goals.
Your thyroid hormone wants you to be high energy, but thyroid hormone has a chain of command, and
it's not going to go out there and make you spend more energy unless the hypothalamus and the
pituitary and the thyroid gland all agree together in a consensus that you are in a state of
energetic abundance and then thyroid hormone is freed to go out and ramp up the metabolic rate.
Now, mainstream physiology acknowledges this because they recognize that you can have um secondary
hypothyroidism that is secondary to a hypothalamic cause.
>> Um and the the most likely reason for someone to have this is that they don't eat enough food.
Um so starvation, uh fasting, caloric deficit, weight loss, all these things will lower thyroid
hormone and some of those are temporary.
So if you're doing intermittent fasting, your thyroid hormone will go down in the fasting state.
It'll go back up in the fed state.
But if you lost 20 pounds over the last year, your thyroid hormone probably went down, even if you
were fat.
Because what happens in a fat person is the metabolic rate goes up just not enough to make them not
fat.
And when they experience weight loss, the metabolic rate goes down just not enough to make them not
uh to make them not have lost the weight that they lost.
Right?
So um now let's take a look at the mechanism.
How does food translate into the hypothalamic, pituitary and thyroid believing that you are high in
energy?
Right?
>> Electrons.
>> If well if you if you if you look at the actual molecular mechanisms, >> it's not mediated by
calories, which is not a thing.
Calories is a measure, right, of of quantity of a thing, right?
>> But calories is like the potential energy in the food.
ATP is the usable energy that you know the ATP didn't come from the the chemical bond energy in ATP
that was derived from the chemical bond energy in the food is the usable form of that energy and so
most of these things are it's not the only mechanism but the central mechanism governing the
response to calories is ATP and this by the way is also how insulin is produced in the pancreas the
pancreas is wired anatomically and physiologically to receive glucose as its primary energy
substrate and that is what that is the reason why glucose is more insulinogenic than say fat but at
the molecular level glucose doesn't cause insulin release glucose increases the amount of ATP in the
pancreatic cell and that drives the process so if you have a bottleneck in your ability to take
energy from food and convert it into ATP that is sufficient for your hypothalamus to think you're
low in energy now generally if you have that kind of bottleneck, it will be present to some degree
in in all your body.
Um, but certainly if you aren't eating any food, that's an easy way for your hypothalamus,
pituitary, and thyroid to be in agreement.
But the pituitary also gets these signals and they play a role in the whether the pituitary listens
to the hypothalamus and the thyroid also gets these signals and they play a role in whether the
thyroid listens to the pituitary.
Right?
So it could be that um inside the thyroid gland you have mitochondrial dysfunction that is biased
towards the thyroid gland and you've gone down the checklist and hypothalamus is like check uh
pituitary check thyroid oh hold up I don't agree that we are in a a highly abundant state.
One of the reasons that could happen is let's say that someone I mean it's always possible to have a
tissue specific disorder but we don't need to go there.
Let's just say someone doesn't have great antioxidant status.
Mitochondria are damaged by oxidative stress, right?
But the thyroid gland is like one of the messiest places in the body for oxidative stress.
And the reason is that the thyroid gland literally makes hydrogen peroxide to oxidize iodide to get
it into the form that's needed to put it into the protein that becomes the thyroid hormone.
Right?
So the thyroid gland is it's such a mess that the thyroid gland makes a hole in the middle of the
cells.
So the thyroid sites are here and they've got this cell cellless hole and they all throw stuff into
that and they call that the follicle lumen and the reason is this thing is a cesspool of oxidative
stress and they don't want their components damaged by it.
Um but it's a danger zone you know like if if you if there was a super fund site would you build
your house next to it?
You know, I mean, you could argue, well, you got a boundary there, but it's kind of close to the
boundary, right?
So, what happens is a lot of hydrogen peroxide leaks back into the thyroid gland.
The thyroid does not just need to isolate it.
It also needs protection from it leaking back.
And that's why if you look at things like uh Hashimoto's thyroiditis, you see benefits to selenium
supplementation.
What's the selenium doing?
It's part of the antioxidant system.
it uh is a activator of glutathione peroxidase which neutralizes the hydrogen peroxide and converts
it to water.
Um okay so let's say someone is uh let's say they have some deficit in their ability to defend the
thyroid mitochondria against oxidative stress.
It's a systemic thing but it's just more relevant the thyroid gland.
the thyroid might be the one that tips over the edge where the thyroid mitochondrial function is
more at a more of a deficit than than the hypothalamus or the pituitary.
And in that person, it looks like a primary h uh hypothyroidism, but you're just you're looking at
the symptom rather than the root cause.
And the root cause is they're not meeting their needs for for antioxidants.
And so their thyroid fell out of consensus with the hypothalamus and the pituitary and they're not
in an energetic state.
You can have another problem like you just you're iodine deficient.
Then you then you know the signals all say go but you just can't make it.
>> Yeah.
>> Um but but that's so that's my point.
And then then the the the converse side of that is the thyroid is going to ramp up the metabolic
rate.
Well yeah but good luck if your mitochondria don't work.
>> Yep.
And so this is the problem where you just mindlessly treat the the thyroid gland with thyroid
hormone is if the problem was you're I mean so the real pro the problem with hormones is that they
communicate a truth and if you're injecting them into the system they're communicating a falsehood.
>> Um and that doesn't mean you should never do it but it means you should be conscious that you are
doing that.
And I so I think sometimes they can sometimes they can break a vicious cycle, but you have to use
the window that opened to you to now um inject in true abundance.
You like you're faking it while you until you make it, right?
>> Take that window of opportunity while you're able to fake it.
Put like the lifestyle work and the you know light hygiene work and the food work and everything to
create a real state of abundance.
and then maybe you can ease off of that or at least the hormones not signaling a lie.
But, you know, I I saw one case where um the parents of a girl who had a real mitochondrial
disorder, like not a not a oh, she's aging a little faster, but like she needed a a a rare disease
specialist.
Um, and there was no one who could figure out what it was during the period of time that's relevant
here.
The point is they put her thyroid was slow.
They put her on thyroid and she felt great for like 2 or 3 days and then it could like just
catastrophically crashed her.
And again, no kidding because the re the thyroid gland was there to impose energetic responsibility
on your budget.
Um and and she didn't have anything in the bank, you know.
Um, so if we go, you know, so if we go back to the five laws of mitochondrial uh, health, um,
putting a hormone in there is like, so I I derived a hierarchy from my five laws of of mitochondrial
health.
And that hierarchy says first you use food, second and first you use food or natural exposure.
So like um, sun is like is like food in this framework.
uh a tonic herb used within the parameters of the tradition that called it a tonic herb could be
could argue food here.
Um number two is after you look at your diet and you're like I know I could get more riboplavin if I
ate more liver but I just can't do it.
Then you can put in a lowd dose supplement to bring yourself up to the to the basic requirements.
Step three is you you you start to understand if you have unique needs and maybe you add supplements
be beyond what they could get from food of those essential nutrients to meet those needs.
Step four is you start taking the mitochondrial infrastructure and you say, you know, maybe I just I
don't know why I'm not making enough CoQ10, but I've done everything I can to optimize my diet and
lifestyle and it it just I I'm going to try CoQ10.
I'm going to see if it works.
And you you put it in there and it starts working.
Number five is stuff with signaling uh power hormones, mitochondrial peptides that like MOT C for
example is a mitochondrial peptide.
What does the research say?
They call it the exercise mimetic peptide.
So the one thing that increases its circulation is exercise, right?
Um so these signaling molecules that are meant to signal a truth, you don't want them to signal a
lie.
And so you have to exercise care with them.
And then you go on to drugs.
uh pharm pharmaceuticals.
Um and so putting thyroid hormone in having no idea why it's low is is really um it's it's really a
violation of the second law of mitochondrial health, which is food before pharma.
And this is like, bro, did you even find out if you were iodine deficient?
And I like every woman that I've ever seen on thyroid hormone who's come to me and done nutritional
analysis, like every single one has low iodine levels.
>> Yeah.
>> And I'm like, yeah, you you got to do that first, you know?
>> Yeah.
Step one.
Well, I mean, what So then what's your take on vitamin D?
Because I have interesting feelings there, quite honestly, given it's a a hormone, but I feel like
I'm not so quick to just say take vitamin D if you're low in vitamin D because like what what led to
that?
then are you signaling a false truth like by just giving vitamin D and I'm not opposed to vitamin D.
I mean this probably similar to you but I just if someone even when they're checking so many boxes
and vitamin D is not where it should be.
I can't help but ask like the why like why why is this a thing?
Like because there's so many paths leading to Rome there with vitamin D.
>> Do you take vitamin D?
>> No.
>> Okay.
I don't take vitamin D either, but my vitamin D levels always always look great.
>> Mine are good.
Mine are good, too.
I do occasionally take cod liver oil, but I a lot of times don't even need that either.
>> I do I do take cod liver oil because my my vitamin A levels usually don't look great.
>> Yeah, same.
But uh but okay so I I think vitamin I mean you always have a trap that you're walking into when you
decide that something is well understood but like if you if you know there's always more research to
do and you always have to make a decision about whether you understand something and I think I
understand vitamin D pretty well.
Um, and so I I am probably maybe a little bit in between where you are and I mean people out there
who think everyone needs vitamin D and and you and I'm probably like right here.
Um, but I think that so first of all, a a lot of the and this is going to sound woke of me or
whatever, but a lot of the research that was done on on optimal vitamin D levels was done white
people.
And um there's very good reason to think that white people are highly unique in uh and when I say
white, I mean people of um you know north and western European ancestry.
Um there's good reason to think that normal levels for us are not uh not necessary for everyone
else.
Um, and there's a really funny paper that was done in Hawaii where they they looked at um they
looked at a bunch of skateboarders and surfers who who spent like 20 hours or more in the afternoon
sun uh per week with no sunscreen.
And they all had vitamin D levels like 35 nanogs per milliliter, 28 nanogs per milliliter around
that area.
And the title of the paper is called um low vitamin D status dis wide it's something like widespread
low vitamin D status despite adequate sunshine and I thought it was hilarious that they didn't stop
and say like maybe something's wrong with our expectations here and um and so the the bottom line is
this um you really can't interpret 25HD which is the marker that people call vitamin D status
without measuring other things that give you the context of like you said why it is the way it is
right like so I agree with you you want to know why it's low um but there's things you can measure
to know why it's low and so one of the things that you can measure is 125 dihydroxy vitamin D or
calcatriol which is it's they call it the active hormone form of the vitamin.
I actually think this is a a misunderstanding because it's a thousand times more active on the
vitamin D receptor than 25 HD.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh but there's a thousand times more of it in circulation.
>> Um or excuse me, there's a thousand times more uh 25 HD in circulation, right?
So, I I think the total activity on the vitamin D receptor between the two is actually quite similar
and that your body adjusts them back and forth like a dial just to fine-tune the response.
>> But, um, so I think that's misunderstood, but it but it's not really important for the the
framework that I use.
So the framework I I use would it would measure at a minimum 25 OHD 125 and it would also measure
parathyroid hormone or PTH and parathyroid hormone um is it's a a handful of it's a a few glands
that sit above the thyroid uh as as it's called and its job is to monitor circulating ionized
calcium and a a lot of the calcium in your blood is is bound up with proteins.
It doesn't care about that fraction.
It cares about the ionized calcium because the ionized calcium is what mediates biological effects.
And I'll tell you what, your parathyroid gland is a lot smarter than you are.
Um, in its specialty, it's it is an expert in knowing how much ionized calcium should be in your
blood.
And so, but the other thing is it's it's monitoring the ionized calcium in your blood uh on a
hundreds of times a second.
Okay?
Do you know anyone who's who's getting their 25HD tested hundreds of times a second?
It just doesn't happen.
Right?
So what you when you see a snapshot of the PTH, you're seeing kind of like the area under the curve
of the recent perception of your parathyroid gland that your vitamin D calcium economy is deficient.
Um and then you can look at 25 OHD and 125 and you can see and then you and you can look at the diet
and you can look at the sun exposure and you can say okay what are the inputs and what should that
make the 25 HD if 125 is massively high you know that 25 HD is low because it's being converted why
is that now you got to look at inflammatory markers because if someone has an um you know if their
CRP is elevated for example That right there is going to tell you that's what's going on.
The problem is an inflammatory one.
Now, does that mean you got to replace the vitamin D?
I think it depends on context.
But in general, my answer is yes.
Because if you look at data on autoimmunity or getting sick, I I think it's clear that you want
vitamin D.
I think you want vitamins A and D.
Um, I think you want the other nutrients, but I think you need to replace the vitamin D that you're
burning through in those situations.
>> Do you think there's a case for people to for most people to go for cod liver oil instead with
the pro-resolving mediators and being able to kind of like >> Well, I'll tell you isolation.
Tell you what, the most the most ancient use of cod liver oil is uh the Scandinavian peasants >>
when they would get sick, they um they would drink up to a pint of cod liver oil per day and then
they would stop drinking it once they were not sick anymore.
>> And how long were they sick?
I guess that's the question.
And so then the me the a few days usually I mean well well um I don't I don't think that was ever
recorded uh in what I read but um but I assume that they were sick for a couple of days.
I don't think that was optimal but I think it was optimal with the tools they had their disposal.
>> Yeah.
>> Um but you know then the medical men came came along and they were they were kind of building
medical science at that time in the 1800s.
Um, and they were like, I don't know about this dosing framework.
Yeah.
>> And they they switched it into uh they would use it like at a one to two teaspoons a day, but
they would only use it for 3 to seven months.
But, you know, if you look at the cumulative dosing, like I think they were kind of just stretching
it out.
Um, and anyway, I I think that uh cod liver oil is biased towards vitamin A, but it's a great source
of both.
I mean because vitamin D can kind of deplete deplete the bioavailable retinol A, right?
>> Oh yeah, that's that's Yeah.
>> So I mean it's like when you're taking >> pioneered the this kind of the synthesis of that about
20 years ago.
Um no, I totally agree on that.
You you want the balance.
Um, and actually there was a study in 1941 where um, all right, so over the course of the 1920s,
there were a bunch of clinical trials with cod liver oil showing that it that it could stop people
from getting sick, that it could cut the time that they were sick and that it that if proactive cod
liver oil administration would cut down lost hours from work in half.
Um, and so the industrialists were very in favor of cod liver oil because their workers wouldn't
wouldn't be out of the out of the out of the workplace.
>> That's why our grandparents were so into it.
>> That's right.
So um so there was a massive public health campaign and and also it it decreased the incidence of
measles.
It decreased uh mortality from measles.
It decreased mortality from bedside fever.
There's lots of these trials on infectious diseases of all sorts.
Um, and Sir Edward Melon, who's credited with discovering vitamin D, he he called vitamin A the
anti-infective vitamin.
Um, and the United States, if you look at cod liver oil imports, the United States had a 25fold
increase of imported cod liver oil over the course of uh 1920 to World War II.
Um, beginning of World War II, you're importing 50 million pounds of cod liver oil a year.
And uh World War II cut the the imports shut.
So like the imports just get go totally off.
But then in the wake of World War II um the antibiotics became popular and then after that the
vaccines uh became popular and people just lost interest in nutrition for immunity which is a big
mistake.
And you see collaborative oil imports that you know they have a dead cap bounce and then they just
gradually fall and now everyone's it's kind of making a comeback now but now everyone's kind of
forgotten about it.
Um but I you know I think a lot of context depends on do you do you get abundant sunshine and some
people are in areas where that's very difficult and so maybe they need more vitamin D.
But I I'm very I'm very much with you on I'm I'm I'm not like, you know, automatically supplement a
level that you consider low without asking any questions.
Yes.
>> And I'm definitely against uh everyone just automatically takes vitamin D.
>> Yeah.
I mean I when people ask me kind of my opinion on that I mean I put it in a similar like very simply
like with men like why why is your testosterone low?
I mean it's that simple, right?
Like like before you just go and do that.
I see the purpose of it.
I see it's like anything in isolation like if your first inkling is to just fix that one thing in
isolation like like that's the first error right like let's like take a bigger look and I I'm
totally with you again like even with testosterone treatment right it's like if that is the tool
that gets you enough oomph to get outside you know I get it the problem is is obviously with
testosterone once you once that ship is sailed that's >> that's a hard one to get back right with
vitamin D I would imagine you have a little bit more slack Like you could take vitamin D, probably
not do a whole lot of damage for a short, you know, who knows, right?
And then come back off of it if you figure out your lifestyle and you name it.
>> Yeah.
I I should say I don't consider vitamin D to be a hormone.
And that is why I am more liberal with it than with testosterone.
And that's because it it is the raw material with which you make a hormone.
Uh so the activated form is the signaling molecule.
But that's also true with vitamin A.
Um that's true with iodine.
It's true with the amino acid tyrrosine.
Like a thyroid hormone is made from tyrrosine iodine.
It's true of cholesterol.
>> Um >> so I see those as fundamentally different.
And in and in my in my framework, in my hierarchy, um testosterone, bringing testosterone from
subpar levels to normal physiological levels is fifth in the hierarchy of things that you would do
because it's exactly in the fifth place.
So I have a very specific framework for that.
But um but yeah, I mean there are many nutrients that you need to make testosterone.
So, it doesn't make any sense not to get your food straight before you before you go that route.
Um, but I, you know, it's interesting with with mitochondrial function, there's evidence from both
humans and animals, like the human evidence is is it's it's all limited.
But if you just look at the collective of what's there, um mitochondrial dysfunction causes low
testosterone and testosterone helps mitochondrial dysfunction.
Um, and it's because these things are all either in a virtual infrastructure and you have your
signals of abundance and you have your energy production, right?
You need the infrastructure and you need the fuel input to make the energy.
You need the energy to signal abundance.
the abundance signaling and the energy go back into maintenance and repair and expansion of
mitochondrial capacity.
You have two choices.
You can be in a virtuous cycle or you can be in a vicious cycle because if you miss any one of those
parts, you can be missing the abundant signaling and you lose the signaling to do the maintenance
and repair and expansion of capacity.
You cannot have the the fuel intake.
You can be starving and and you just simply can't make the energy.
You can be missing mitochondrial infrastructure.
So you can't make the energy.
If mitochondrial, if mitochondrial energy production fuels the production, maintenance, synthesis,
um production, maintenance, repair, and distribution of everything in your body, does the same for
itself, right?
So if you have a loss of any of those things, the mitochondria aren't going to be making as much
energy.
They're going to have left less energy left over to maintain repair themselves.
So you will get a vicious cycle of declining mitochondrial infrastructure, declining energy
production and declining abundant signaling.
Abundant signaling is thyroid hormone.
Testosterone, estrogen and sex hormones are basically if thyroid hormone is just signaling
quantitative generic abundance.
Testosterone and estrogen are adding nuance to that.
They're saying what do we want to do with this energy?
They're taking information about context like life stage, sex, etc.
>> There's a hierarchy within that, I'm sure.
Yeah.
>> Um, and so what they're actually doing is they're turning up the dial on specific mitochondrial
networks.
They're saying in these neurological networks and in these tissues, we want mitochondrial energy
production to go up.
So all of this is a web of of um energetic abundance, its infrastructure, its substance and its
signaling.
And so any any of these things have the ca the have the capability to convert a vicious cycle into a
virtuous cycle, which is what you always want to do.
It's just that they don't all have the same riskreward profiles, right?
So, there are studies showing that if someone has low testosterone and you increase their
testosterone, they'll get more CoQ10.
>> And there are studies showing that if someone has low testosterone, they have low CoQ10, you
supplement CoQ10, they increase their testosterone.
Which one of those two things has the better riskreward profile?
The CoQ10 because it's not a signaling molecule.
It's not communicating a truth.
It's putting in the raw materials of the substance of what you need for the testosterone to be able
to carry out its abundant signaling.
So, I think that's the way you want to think about it.
You want to um you I don't think all benefit of testosterone is fake.
Um but it can be fake.
It can be a debt that you're incurring that you'll pay back.
>> That's Yeah.
Well, on many levels, not just not not just a hormonal debt, but even like an energetic debt.
Like the way like like when you're explaining this, I vision envision this this big reservoir like
almost like thyroid like where this is like this big reservoir that's regulating energy and these
like all these subreservoirs, right?
And it's like all of a sudden you're like cranking up the demand artificially from this one
reservoir when this full main reservoir is empty, right?
You're not you're not manufacturing energy, right?
You're not getting energy because your mitochondria is dysfunctional, period.
And so it's like you're trying to crank up this dial.
It's like you're artificially like throttling this this one dial that doesn't actually have a master
regulator, if that makes sense.
>> I agree with that.
I I do think that it's I do think that, you know, some people are just like in so much trouble that
you want to throw the kitchen sink at it.
Um, but most people aren't.
And I you know I do think it's I think it is possible that people are getting are getting if if tes
if mitochondrial function supports testosterone testosterone supports mitochondrial function.
It's possible that people are getting a real mitochondrial benefit by administering some
testosterone but it's the downside risk is what you said that it's that it is you know it's
fundamentally communicating something that's not there and you're going to pay for it in the end.
>> I just don't want to be dependent on pharma for my life.
That's that's like what it comes down to.
Like I don't want to be want to.
>> No, like that's that's the biggest thing.
It's like um >> you know, interestingly enough, like >> my testosterone levels sit around 600 and
two years ago they were around 300 and one of the only things I changed was CoQ10.
>> Oh wow.
>> Interestingly enough.
And that's literally as of last week, you know, new blood panel, right?
So it's the highest my testosterone has been in >> probably like seven years because it's like sat
in the 200s for a really long time.
>> And do you feel it?
>> I Yes, I feel it in recovery.
I don't wouldn't say it tr this was going to be my next question.
It doesn't necessarily translate into the libido that I once thought 600 would feel like.
Right now 600 is not high but it's perfectly in a perfect range.
And I was maintaining muscle mass just fine in the 200s.
>> Is muscle mass better now?
Is it is it easier to gain or >> if anything because I'm kind of actively trying to I shouldn't say
lose muscle but like I didn't want to be as bulky anymore.
So that's a tough question to answer because but I would say it's hard to lose like I like I run a
lot.
I do it.
So it's uh I would say the muscle holds on very very very well.
Like I have to make a concerted effort to almost try to lose it if I want to and I can be I probably
fast too much, right?
It's like so like I am in the state where it's actually strangely hold on to as much muscle as I
can.
And I think that you know we could get into receptor density and all this stuff that save that for
another day too.
But I think that what's relevant in the blood is different than what's actually at the PL at the
tissue level with muscle, right?
Because I was able to maintain so much muscle with relatively low testosterone.
Um, so I would say what I feel differently now is effort feels good, right?
That's the main thing.
Effort feels good.
Whereas when it was lower, effort was like work that wasn't that it was it's always kind of fun but
wasn't fun, right?
Um, doesn't necessarily translate to the libido, which is going to be my next question, right?
Like libido is fine, but it isn't double from what it was, right?
So you mentioned libido being like a life force, like a sign of abundance thing.
What is your take on the relationship between testosterone and libido and then where is
mitochondrial function factor in with libido if testosterone is even removed out of the equation?
>> I'm going to answer that, but I I have a couple more questions about your story.
So um how much are you taking CoQ10?
Uh >> I'm taking 600.
And did you get at that to that dose because you gradually went up and you saw that it benefited you
more than lower doses?
>> I took I took 300 for years and then I stopped taking it and I realized that like I felt no
different from 300 to nothing.
So I went to 600.
>> Oh, interesting.
Yeah.
Have you tried higher?
>> No.
>> Okay.
And do you know if 300 did anything to testosterone?
Was it >> that was the time where >> that was?
Yeah.
I mean there was nothing really.
So yeah.
>> Interesting.
So I >> but also I mean think about you know ketogenic diet for 12 years right like I mean for five
or six of those years like pretty much never going off of it.
So that had to have made some impact there right?
>> Yeah.
>> So then coming off of a ketogenic diet.
So there's >> your diet lowered your testosterone or or >> I would say it stayed about the same.
So, I lost so much weight when I was doing keto.
It's hard to really see that, right?
Because like so many things improved that it's hard to say like was like this a result of weight
loss, was it a result of, you know, what?
>> So, >> all I know is that, you know, 300 didn't do much for me.
Uh, but the confounder is that >> over the last few years, carbs have come back into my diet as
well, right?
But that didn't impact testosterone.
As a matter of fact, on this recent I'm in ketosis right now and this recent blood work I was in
ketosis and my testosterone was higher than a Smith.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah.
That's really interesting.
>> So I um there's a a case in one of our early customers for the maidome test where this guy had
testosterone in less than uh it was in the 100s and he had a history of gynecomastia.
He had gotten that removed.
he had, you know, low libido, low energy and all that stuff.
And it was interesting because his results suggested that he had a problem with mitochondrial iron
metabolism.
He actually needed to get his vitamin D higher.
And this was also like it it made a lot of sense with his previous work on different doses of
vitamin D.
So he got his testosterone to triple from increasing his vitamin D, which by the way is totally in
contrast to what you see in the scientific literature.
Scientific literature says you can get a testosterone boost if your vitamin D is real low and you
get up to like 30 NOGS per milliliter 25HD.
That'll boost your testosterone, but there's no benefit of going above that.
>> But his optimal testosterone kicked in around 85 nanogs per milliliter.
So I think that was an idiosyn idiosyncrasy, a unique need for him.
But what I found really fascinating was after the point where his testosterone got up to where it
tripled, it was still only in the 400s.
And his results, his life results sounded really dramatic.
Like he's he was always cold intolerant and he's like, "Now I run 5ks with no shirt on in January."
Um, and stuff like that.
And so like lifestyle-wise it like sounded like a miracle.
testosterone, you're like 400 65.
It's not super impressive.
>> But he also found that he could get his testosterone to go up higher, >> but it stopped
correlating to the results that he was getting.
>> Yeah.
>> And my interpretation of that was that the the big gain, and this sounds the same for you
actually cuz you cuz yours went up with CoQ10, right?
>> The big gain was in his mitochondria.
And part of it was that he optimized mitochondrial energy production to feed forward into abundant
signaling and testosterone synthesis.
>> But the real benefit of the testosterone directed energetic um mobilization is from the
improvement in the mitochondrial response to the testosterone.
So if the mitochondria on the receiving end of the testosterone were similarly benefited then I
think it just they got to better than normal better than the average person's and so he doesn't need
as much testosterone as the average person needs to get that healthy >> you know >> and I think this
we really don't the the people who want to do this pharmacologically they don't know as much as they
think they do and they can't measure all the things that are relevant because you know you can
measure something like DHT uh dihydrotestosterone being converted from testosterone which is more
potent on the androgen receptor but you can't measure androgen receptor sensitivity >> um I mean you
you you could in a >> you know in a in a very indepth endocrinological study you could measure proxy
markers of androgen and sensitivity, but you're not in a in a normal clinical context and in a
context where most people are operating when they're doing HRT, you don't have the tools to measure
whether the mitochondrial response.
So now we're not even talking about androgen receptor sensitivity because you're not talking about
like the androgenic proxies of the receptor being activated.
you're talking about the real goal of the testosterone which is in the reproductive tissues or in
the other tissues under its governance the mitochondrial energy production ramps up to fuel the
processes that it wants to happen in those cells and if you're not measuring mitochondrial function
you're not going to see that um and so I think this ties into the question that you were asking uh
which is basically what are the relationships there so the relationship is um thyroid roid.
Uh, and there there are others.
So, you've you've got like there are many, but you could you could kind of divide the energy budget
signaling into leptin signals your long-term energy status.
Insulin signals your short-term energy status.
Cortisol and inflammation uh signal two different types of emergency demands on the energy budget.
Cortisol is more focused on um the brain having energy almost nervous system more >> and and
inflammation is more focused on the immune system having the energy.
But if you look at what happens when you get sick, man, you're talking about >> explosions of cells.
They they call it um e emergency myo poesis which is uh there is an emergency we're now going to
have like thousandfold increases in these types of cells that's a lot of energy and then if you look
at things like how does a neutrfll destroy a pathogen it's energy you're burning through glycogen to
do it you know um and so so you've got uh literal fuel availability is leptin and insulin.
Um and demands on the energy that detract from the long-term investment of that energy into
longevity and uh pure health and uh into things that are not emergencies.
the long-term projects that you want uh either to keep you living long or because you have a long-
term goal like you're trying to gain muscle or you're trying to whatever.
Um, and so then starting at the brain, cascading down to the endocrine system, your brain is
responding to the leptin, the insulin, the inflammation, and the cortisol.
And it's integrating that with its own intracellular ATP production from the fuel circulating that
got into the brain.
And then it's sending messages down to the endocrine system.
And each level including the pituitary and the target endocrine gland integrate that with their
knowledge of how much energy am I able to produce from food and then you get an integrated judgment
from that of how much energy can you afford to expend.
So thyroid is the first and most general signal of we have abundant energy.
We're going to start investing in long-term projects instead of emergencies.
And then testosterone sex hormones are coming in and they are bifurcating that energy distribution
where they're saying you know uh the adrenals or the um testes or the female um or the ovaries etc
are making decisions like um I'm a male, I'm a female or decisions like I should be in reproductive
age, I'm a child, I'm past reproductive age and and all those different context or or just more
generic signals from the experience of life are all then being integrated into how much of this
energy should go into um reproductive like uh activities and how much should go into the other
defaults.
Um, to tie this into libido, I think that libido is, and by the way, that it's, you know,
testosterone sex hormones are signaling more than just reproductive priorities.
They're also signaling other I mean, obviously, they're signaling like secondary sex characteristics
and stuff like that during development, but I think they also prioritize uh energy differently.
So I I do see that like um finasteride is is the feminine urge to protect your hair over your brain
and your penis.
And I I say this on the basis >> I'm with you.
I'm with you.
I say this on the basis that uh if you look at at DHT signaling in different types of cells like it
improves mitochondrial function in brain cell in like male brains and and in penises and it hurts
mitochondrial function in uh in hair follicles and so you know why why is that I think it's I mean
ultimately each person is a choice and you know has choices they have to make and I and I'm not an
authoritarian on on gender characteristics, but biology has an opinion and the opinion of biology is
that um is that first of all you want to have enough energy that that you can peacock that I used I
used to say that like hair and skin was like biological peacocking and then I was like wait a second
why do they call it peacocking you know the original the OG of peacocking was the peacock right and
that's and that so biological peacocking is the OG peacocking and biological peacocking is is um you
know it's saying I'm going to grow hair because I don't I don't need a budget you know it's it's
saying like >> that's pretty accurate though >> you know it's like it's like riding around in a
Lambo it's like say it's saying I don't need a budget you know um >> and so uh and so ideally you
don't want a budget you know like Like ideally you would you would prefer um to not to you know to
not have to think about how much money you're spending on dinner.
>> Does it all just come down to I mean mitochondrial efficiency function being able to handle
adequate amounts of energy and not have to go into these like scarcity mindsets.
If you can handle more food, good quality food, if you can handle more good quality food and you can
actually manifest that into something, there you have it.
>> That's right.
Um and and so I think that the tradeoff the tradeoff between um the hair and the brain uh it just
doesn't matter if you have enough energy for both.
um if you don't now you impose the budget and I and I think that um I think pharma does a real
disservice to the way we think about things because it makes everyone think that there's a trade-off
to everything but there isn't a trade-off to everything.
Um like you know you someone can be going blind from vitamin A deficiency and you can cure their
blindness with vitamin A way out of anywhere not being anywhere near what would create toxicity.
That's an insanely awesome riskreward ratio.
So, I think we like if you're thinking about the tradeoff like I I need to um I need to stop my hair
from falling out, but you know, this list of side effects might happen on the label and they and
they include um sexual dysfunction.
Uh that's the cost I'm willing to pay.
I think you want to get out of that mindset.
We want to think, how do I avoid the trade-off in the first place?
How do I produce enough cellular energy that I'm not forced to choose between my hair and my brain
or between my hair and and and my testicles?
Um, and the path to doing that is the path of optimal mitochondrial function.
Where do you stand on carbohydrates as a signaling molecule, a signaling device?
Right?
Because if we this this is linked because regardless of where my testosterone levels are at a bolus
of carbohydrates creates a short-term libido increase >> for me, right?
But I'm not the only one that will tell you that other is that psychological because uh the fitness
community tends to keep ourselves in these like chronic deficits and probably at unhealthy levels
and you know and then all of a sudden you have abundance and you're just like okay let's go or like
I I tend to view carbohydrates a little bit more as a silic signaling device more than anything else
like for me but again I am distorted because of the lens in which I've looked at nutrition for over
a decade right um so I'm just curious your take on that because obviously it's irrelevant to mic
ondria discussion.
>> Yeah.
Um, so how how many grams of carbs you you getting now?
>> Well, presently I'm in ketosis.
So, presently 40 or 50, but I would say if I'm not in ketosis, it's still relatively low carb.
Maybe 120.
So, it's pretty low.
And especially for my exercise demand.
>> And when you say you take a bullet, >> when I will spike, it'll be, you know, maybe a 150
additional bololis, right?
So, I might go up to closer to 300.
>> And what how many calories do you get a day?
Uh, dude, I really stopped counting, but I if I had to say it.
No, >> I guess.
>> Yeah, >> probably 2,800.
>> Oh, interesting.
Okay.
Yeah.
>> So, I I get about 20 Right now, I'm getting about 2900.
>> Okay.
>> Um, and I I just eat I just eat 150 grams of carbs a day pretty much.
>> You're pretty low.
I mean, that's still lowish by >> It's Yeah, I mean, some people would consider low carb, but it's
>> I don't think it's low carb.
I mean, a lot most people would, but I'm with you.
>> Yeah.
But it's like my my ketones, my morning ketones are like zero or 0.1 right now.
>> Um, but I've I've been as low as 30 to 40 g Oh, that's a net carbs, by the way.
Okay.
Uh, not not total carbs.
Um, I've been as low as 30 to 40 gram of net carbs and I've been as high as I think 340 gram of net
carbs.
And I I find that a 100 like I did a lot of experimentation just to find that like what I always
gravitated to in the past was my sweet spot.
Um, but when I'm lower than that, I get increased muscle tension and when I'm if I'm like a way
above 200 grams, like somewhere between like 200 and and 340 grams of net carbs, I find that my
meals my en my energetic tone gets destabilized between meals >> and I wind up having to get fat to
sleep.
Yeah, >> like I'll have to eat more and more calories to to not get like dips in brain function
between meals >> and I'll have to eat more and more calories to sleep and at first I've done this
several times.
At first it seems like my metabolic rate is going up but then it just catches up with me and I get
fat.
>> Yeah.
>> Um >> yeah, same.
So 100 150 gram of net carbs for me is the sweet spot where my I'm sta I'm energetically stable but
my muscle tension and kind of overall anxiety tone >> yeah I'm a little too much in my head below
100 like I I live in my head right like it's like I feel like I'm way up there whereas like if carbs
go up above 100 or so generally speaking I I I elevator down a little bit and I'm more in my body
and less just like kind manic, you know, but it's that's not like the first couple weeks of >> that
you're you're too in your head when you're low carb.
>> When I'm very when I'm very low carb, yeah, even on a ketogenic state too much, it's like too
much too much energy in the brain.
Um, however, I will use it as a tool if my filming load is high or because I'm okay with living in
my head for a little while if I have to sprint, right?
If I have to cognitively sprint.
Um, that being said, you go down a million rabbit holes with it, but you know, for the first like
month on a ketogenic diet after being off of it for extended periods of time, I will sleep like a
rock.
After about a month, it the sleep starts to get crappy and carbs do need to kind of come in and then
it starts where I run into body composition issues is when carbs and fats are in the diet at the
same time.
You know, people people say the Randall cycle isn't really a thing.
like going to say you're you're a rand cycle uh >> you know who knows right like I I try to look at
things very objectively with that but it definitely seems as though for me if fats and carbs are in
the same meal it does not work out well >> interesting >> so it's it's funny if you look at a
biochemistry book a textbook they'll have a chapter on the fasting feeding cycle and in the context
of a traditional biochemistry or physiology textbook, insulin is the signal like it's the signal
part excellence of the fed state.
>> And so it's very interesting because that like the way the biochemistry textbook describes it,
the carbohydrate in the meal is is like the central governing force of you transitioning from a from
a a fasting state into a fed state.
And it's interesting because keto diets really like demand an an alternative explanation because
it's, you know, you can tell the difference between the fasting state, the fed state on a keto diet,
you know.
Um, but the way that I see it is I see keto diets as a biohack um rather than as a default natural
state.
So I do see ketones as a default natural fuel.
Um even in even in someone where the resting fasting ketones are like 0 or 0.1 on a on like a meter,
that person's probably still making 140 calories of ketones overnight and they consumed it and so it
didn't show up in their blood.
Plus, the blood meters are measuring like half of the ketones in the blood because they don't
measure accetoacetate.
Um, and it's definitely the case that there are catabolic conditions where or just like net, you
know, like newborn babies, um, fasting, uh, where ketones play a more important role.
And it's definitely the case that there are areas far from the equator where there were people in I
don't know about ancient past but in kind of like you know in what you could call ancestral past
where the diet was super low in carbs.
I think the but you know some of those are not as ancestral as people say.
So as an example in the Messiah who are a cattle hering tribe from Kenya and Tanzania a lot of
people describe their diet as being only meat only animal products.
First of all it's even even on only milk and meat.
It's not that keto because their milk has a bunch of sugar in it.
Um but it's only the males at a certain window of time during their teenage years that have that
strict diet.
Um, and you know, they they raised cattle, but like you can go back a hundred over a hundred years
and you find evidence of abundant trading that they did with neighboring tribes where their diet had
a lot of starch in it.
If you go into the Inuit now, you have questions of genetic mutations where they actually have um
impaired ketogenesis.
So they're not even it's like debatable whether they were even ketogenic on a diet that should have
been ketogenic.
So to me the keto diet is not the ancestral diet.
To me the keto diet was invented in 1929 by the Mayo Clinic as an as an alternative to
pheninoarbital to uh treat seizures.
>> And they were looking at it as a biohack.
They were saying um we know that pheninoarbatital sucks.
We wish we didn't have to administer it to these patients and we know that an alternative is fasting
but fasting has a big problem which is that if you keep doing it forever you die.
Um so they were saying how can we leverage this as sustainable and they by the way they didn't know
anything about how these things were actually metabolized back then.
They they called carbs ketoytic to to to be litic means to break something apart >> because they
thought they they said oh you put the carbs and the ketones go down the the carbs must be busting
the ketone in half.
Um so they really didn't know anything about the biochemical pathways but they knew that fasting was
distinguished by having extremely high urinary ketones.
So they said, "Huh, is there some way to get extremely high urinary ketones but also get enough food
to prevent starvation?" And the ketogenic diet was born.
And you know, now they say the ketogenic diet is for refractory epilepsy, which means that the
epilepsy doesn't get cured by our drugs.
But that Mayo Clinic didn't invent it for refractory epilepsy.
They invented it because pheninoarbital sucks.
And they were they like the keto diet was invented so that you could have drug-free treatment of
seizures.
Super interesting question is a why does the keto diet have a profound increase in GABA in the
brain?
>> Yeah, it's kind of a puzzle, but it's so good that it's more effective than the average drug that
that gets a gabberurgic response for seizure treatment.
I mean you do you do need an extreme diet to get extreme results but but you can get the extreme
results right but the interesting thing is I I don't know that anyone has ever discovered a syndrome
of protracted withdrawal from the gabaurgic effect of a ketogenic diet.
>> No >> benzoazipines have that.
>> Yeah >> people get nuance at seizure.
There's uh the case reports on benzoazipines there was a um in fact this is commonly cited in the
most recent reviews of how long do you have to be on benzo to get a withdrawal syndrome um and the
answer is is uh less than two weeks and that's derived from a case series where they went into the
French um reporting system for adverse drug effects and they said and they they extracted all the
cases of new onset seizures years after benzo withdrawal and out of out of 39 people only six of
them had a family history or previous experience of a seizure.
So like the benzo were not being used to treat seizures and most of the people had no reason to
think they had a predisposition but six of the people had their seizures less when they were on the
benzo for less than 15 days.
H >> I've never heard of someone who gets new onset seizures from withdrawing from a keto diet.
>> No.
>> Um and yet the keto diet was used uh 40 years before benzo were used for for you know drug-like
benefits to seizures.
Right?
So this just kind of goes back to the food first, pharma last, second law of mitochondrial health,
which is you don't need to know all the mechanisms to know why food is better than pharma.
But the riskreward profile of the keto diet is clearly better than better than the drugs.
And I think that's why it's like I understand that it's super difficult for parents to put kids on
an extreme keto diet.
Yeah, I get it.
And it's not like a walk in the park, but it also seems kind of criminal that they've that they've
confined it to to this is for refractory epilepsy when all known experience says the ketoide is way
safer than the gaper drugs that they use to treat the seizures.
Now, like those drugs are safer than pheninoarbatital was um but they're a little bit safer.
No, they're a little bit safer.
They're not.
But the keto diet is a lot safer, you know.
>> I mean, even Yeah.
I mean, even the monoesters, even some of the interesting evidence there, it's like for literal
withdrawals itself, right?
Just because I mean, you are essentially in the brain, you have this impaired mitochondrial function
from alcoholism and you're essentially allowing a ketone body to backdoor into the mitochondria and
essentially get them that feeling of being a functional alcoholic without the alcohol.
Right?
So, it's like you it actually goes beyond not having a withdrawal.
It's literally used to help combat that at this point.
Um, at least that's a more so with the salt.
I mean, not so much on a ketogenic diet because now more of the evidence is being pointed towards
using these exogenous ketones, which I have mixed feelings on.
The point is still the same mechanism at play essentially because I don't think that it's caloric
related with a ketogenic diet because most people that are on a ketogenic diet are eating very
sufficient calories even though there's a lot of people that claim that's not the case.
I don't know many people you absolutely can get fat on a ketogenic diet and I've seen it happen with
lots of people because it's very easy to overeat calories.
So it's definitely not like signaling in that regard.
So when you start looking like you know Chris Palmer and all these guys that are kind of looking at
the uh you know brain energy stuff like it is very effective for getting people off of alcohol and
off of drugs because you're basically making their brain feel good again like they're not feeling
the need to pull for that as much.
>> Yeah.
I think it's well I mean first of all the the the impetus to call every to categorize everything
about health as a matter of calories is is it has to be one of the most obnoxious trends.
>> Thank god it's it's finally starting to die a little bit thankfully.
>> I mean it's it's so uncreative and it's so it's so like >> it's insulting.
It's >> like like no, no one no one's like no one is reading the literature on >> um keto diets and
epilepsy and coming away with the impression that it's mediated by weight loss.
People are knee-jerk saying that because they because it's their pet thing to say.
But so that's that's just shouldn't we don't even need to entertain that.
But um I do think there's there is a heterogenous component to why the keto diets work.
So for example, there are metabolic disorders that cause seizures that are profound intolerances to
glucose like a a gl one uh transporter defect will make it so the brain cannot get glucose and so
rising ketones to displace the glucose now the brain can get fed and it's as simple as that.
There are others like um there are blocks in ketone utilization that are similar.
There are blocks in fatty acid oxidation that are similar.
And interestingly enough, uh ketone salts and esters were not invented for any of the reasons that
they're popular today.
They were used medically going back many decades for one specific purpose, which is to shut off fat
burning in people with fatty acid oxidation disorders.
Um, and this, you know, pe people associate ketones with fat burning, but if you're taking exogenous
ketones, you're not you're not putting yourself into a fat burning shutting it down, right?
Because >> because ketones are the I mean, first of all, they have calories.
The more calories you have, the less fat you'll burn.
But more specifically, ketones are the end product of fasting.
So they have a negative feedback loop with lipolysis.
Um so you go back into the 70s and they're they're curing people um or at least treating them if not
curing them with exogenous ketones because they have fatty acid oxidation disorders.
They cannot burn the fat but they can use the ketones.
The ketones will shut down the fat burning um and they'll be utilized.
But there are people with ketone utilization disorders and exogenous ketones are going to be
catastrophic for those people.
So I don't think but but that's not the generic reason why ketone diets work for most epilepsy.
The generic reason why they work for most epilepsy and remember cuz they weren't invented for
refractory.
Right.
So in 1929 they were using it.
It didn't matter.
Well they said idiopathic epilepsy but that basically meant if your epilepsy was not because someone
took a sledgehammer to your head.
Yeah, >> it was that was idiopathic, right?
Um and so you know ketone diet ketogenic diets has worked across the board for those people and it
wasn't like oh the rare person with such and such a defect and that's so obviously because they
increase GABA in the brain almost all almost all types of and seizures by the way are like if you
read the most recent classification schemas for seiz for epilepsy the they start out by saying you
know we wish we understood what causes epilepsy enough to group them based on their cause, but we
don't.
So, we're going to group them based on their symptoms.
>> Yeah.
>> So, they admit right out in the open that they have no idea what they're doing.
Um, and they've been most of the drugs that they put people on with the basically with the exception
of absence seizures, they're putting people on um on gabaurgic medications and they're just
rotating.
They're, oh, that one didn't work.
We'll try the next one.
Such as bzzoazipines um or or other um things.
It's it's it's just very clear that what the keto diet is doing is it's increasing the GABA.
But I but it just it seems a little puzzling.
Why why are ketones tied to the GABAurgic effect?
And I think that makes so much more sense if you connect them with fasting than if you connect them
with the idea that the ancestral diet was ketogenic.
Um, and by the way, I mean the the other piece of evidence I didn't mention before is that in
huntergatherer societies, the closer you get to the equator, the higher the plant foods go up.
Uh, it doesn't go way up.
Like it's like goes up to like 37% of calories, but at the equator, uh, where humans are proposed to
have evolved.
Um, you could make arguments about maybe during certain eras, but from what we know, like when plant
foods are abundantly available year round, people eat them.
Anyway, um so in the fasting state, why does it make more sense to have more GABA?
>> Well, it's it's slowing down the energetic demand >> when you have less energy coming in.
And I think that but the other thing is if you look at that very interesting work, I think it was
Vichch who did it who was a student of Krebs who the Kreb cycle is named after.
um that shows that at the at the mitochondrial respiratory chain where the engines of energy
production are, the ketones extend the value of the incoming food energy to make more ATP than you
would think they would be able to with it.
That also makes sense in fasting because you're in energy conservation mode.
And in fact, that's one of the things that you see with weight loss is that metabolic rate goes
down, but also energetic efficiency goes up >> to counteract the weight loss.
Um, >> and so these are that is energy deficit mode.
I think what the Mayo Clinic did was a profoundly ingenious biohack where they said, "How do we mix
this fasting dominant state with being wellfed enough to capture the advantages caused by the
ketogenesis sufficiently to counteract all the epilepsy and yet to keep the person wellfed and
energetic enough to carry forth their daily life?" And that's the other thing is phenobarbatl you're
a zombie a ketogenic diet you're not you know this yeah you know and you you know maybe you have
relative deficits in some areas sometimes >> micronutrient touch stuff but yeah which I think that's
where a lot of the people longer term ketogenic that's where the problems come in is because for
most people doing it you end up with these micronutrient deficiencies because you're just you're
almost on a mono diet a lot of these people or they're just eating processed keto stuff you kind of
run into the same problems you know and you end up with these deficiencies where it's like people
feel really good for like that first, you know, first week can be a little rocky, but then they feel
really good for two, three, four, five weeks and then it's like, okay, then something's starting to
give, right?
>> And you're and you're changing your energy requirements.
So, so for example, carbs b use more thamin, which is vitamin B1 in their burning.
Uh fats use more riboplavin, they use more CoQ10, um they use more carnitine.
So you can you can have a very long arc of you know you increased your need for a nutrient by 20%.
And if you don't somehow fix that you're you're going to have a a you're going to lose the benefit
or or wind up in adverse territory.
>> Yeah.
>> No, that's an interesting Well, man, I want to uh go a million different directions on so many
things, but on this one, where can everyone find you?
>> Uh my newsletter is chrismasterjohphd.substack.com substack.com and my mitochondrial testing is
at mito.me.
>> Right on, man.
Thanks, brother.
All right.
