If you've got high cholesterol then this video is for you.
Hi.
I'm Dr.
Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com.
And you're watching Chris Masterjohn Lite, where the name of the game is "Details ?
Shmeetails.
Just tell me what works!" And in this video we're gonna talk about the 5 best ways to lower your
cholesterol naturally.
Number 1: lose weight.
If you're overweight or you're obese, the best thing that you can do to lower your cholesterol is to
gain an ideal body weight.
If you want to know whether that's something that applies to you google BMI calculator.
A calculator will come up at the top of the screen, and you can put in your height and your weight.
It'll tell you if you're overweight or you're obese.
If your BMI is over 25, you probably need to lose weight.
And if it's over 30, you really, really need to lose weight.
And if you look at your own fat, and you see that there are rolls and rolls of fat hanging off you,
you still need to lose weight.
But it's not as harmful as if you look at yourself and you don't see those rolls.
Because if your extra weight is being carried in your abdomen internally that's the most
metabolically harmful.
There are a few situations where BMI won't apply.
For example, if you're really lean and muscular.
Your muscles may be upping your BMI but come on you know if that's true.
The BMI calculator, for most cases is reliable.
If you want to know how to lose weight, please see the last two videos about weight loss.
If you're really stressed out this can also raise your cholesterol.
And if you're really stressed out and you're overweight, it's better to address the stress first
because weight loss itself can be stressful.
So manage these two things together.
Number 2: Address your inflammation.
The way that you know this applies to you is if you're high sensitivity c-reactive protein is over
1.
If you get HS CRP measured and it's below one, this probably doesn't apply to you.
The higher it is, the more it matters.
So how do you control inflammation?
It could be a lot of things.
But if you're overweight, that itself can matter.
So to address inflammation you have to address body composition.
A good exercise program, several times a week with a mix of a lot of light activity, like walking
and or cycling or jogging, and a little bit of moderate and high intensity activity worked in, is
the best way to address exercise.
If you smoke, quit smoking.
If you eat a lot of refined food, get rid of the refined food and improve your dietary quality.
If these things don't work to get your CRP into the healthy range, you really should talk to your
doctor to work more closely on this because you could have an inflammatory disease or you could have
allergies or food intolerances that are contributing to them as well.
When you do measure CRP, keep in mind that if you're fighting off a cold or anything like that it
can raise it, so it's best to have two or three measurements before making a decision.
Number 3: Check your thyroid status.
Your doctor may have measured your TSH, which is something that rises in certain kinds of thyroid
problems.
But it's best to find a doctor who really knows how to utilize a full thyroid panel.
That means TSH, free and total thyroid hormones, both T4 and T3, reverse T3 and antithyroid
antibodies.
Find the right healthcare practitioner who can verify that you don't have a thyroid disorder, and if
you do, treat it.
Number 4: Increase your dietary fiber through unrefined plant foods.
You know this is you because if you're not eating a lot of unrefined plant foods, you probably need
to eat more.
Number 5: Replace fat with carbohydrate.
You know this applies to you if your cholesterol's really high, and you're eating a lot of fat and
very little carbohydrate.
Keep in mind that a lot of people find it easiest to lose weight with a low carbohydrate diet.
If that applies to you, then make sure you reach your stable body weight first.
But don't assume it applies to you.
Some people lose weight easier with a low-fat diet.
Test these things out to see what works, and if you really want to know whether replacing fat with
carbohydrate is the best way to lower your cholesterol.
Just replace fat with carbohydrate and see if it works.
You can see if these are the five top things to lower your cholesterol naturally, some people may
have two or three of them going on, some people may only have one.
And then some people some of them might be more important than others.
I'm not saying that everyone needs to eat a high carbohydrate low-fat diet.
I'm just saying that if your ideal body composition and your metabolic health is otherwise good, but
your cholesterol goes through the roof when you eat a high-fat low-carbohydrate diet, it's pretty
obvious what the problem is.
Now, it is the case, that replacing saturated fats with polyunsaturated fats will lower your
cholesterol.
But there's lots of science that has failed to show that this will lower your risk of heart disease.
So I don't think it's a good way of lowering your cholesterol.
I think that, in some people, replacing saturated fat with monounsaturated fat, may have a minor,
but significant effect.
I think that's safe to try, and if you want to, go ahead and do it.
But I don't think it's as important as the top five things that I listed.
All right, I hope you found this useful.
Signing off, this is Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com.
You've been watching Chris Masterjohn Lite.
I will see you in the next video.
