The first runner-up is from Dora C..
She says, "Can you clarify what the real issue with seed oils is?
Is it the way they're processed oxidation linoleic content or something else?
I get confused with all the online noise about this issue." All right.
I think the appropriate place to go to learn about this topic is to the courses on the Masterpass,
and we're going to go down to the antioxidant system, and I think the two relevant courses that are
most valuable to look at are lesson two, Pathological Roles of Oxidants and lesson four, Vitamin E.
So if you go to Pathological Roles of Oxidants, we're going to skip over oxidative stress, and we're
going to look at oxidative damage.
Oxidative damage to lipids is the real problem with seed oils.
This is irreversible modification of macromolecules, such as lipid, protein, or DNA.
Oxidation of lipids is a subset of oxidative damage, and oxidative damage to lipids is often what
comes first to drive oxidative damage of these other things.
So for example, in a lipoprotein, it's the polyunsaturated fatty acids in the membrane of the
lipoprotein, such as LDL that oxidize before the protein in the lipoprotein Apo B oxidizes, and
that's a contributor to atherosclerosis, and the oxidation of the lipids is more sensitive than the
oxidation of the protein, but it also drives the oxidation of the protein, and in a cell, if you
have cell membrane lipids that oxidize, they fragment into highly soluble and highly reactive
products, such as malondialdehyde or 4-hydroxy-nonenal that can then slide into the nucleus and
conduct oxidative damage to the DNA.
So we're going to focus on oxidative damage to lipids, but we're going to realize that the things
we're talking about here can cause oxidative damage to other macromolecules such as proteins and
DNA.
If you look at a saturated fatty acid in the upper left versus a monounsaturated fatty acid in the
upper right versus a polyunsaturated fatty acid in the lower left, and the example is linoleic acid,
which was mentioned in the question, the difference is the number of unsaturated bonds, and so what
we mean by saturated is all carbon atoms, regardless of whether they're in a fatty acid or any other
molecule, have four binding sites.
In a saturated fatty acid, they are all bound to other carbon atoms, and any excess binding sites
are bound to hydrogen atoms, and so if you have a carbon on the end, it can be bound to three
hydrogen atoms and use its one remaining binding site for the carbon next to it, but any of these
carbons in the middle are bound to two carbons on either side.
That's two binding sites, that leaves two more binding sites to bind to hydrogen.
This carbon on the end is what makes this a fatty acid.
This is the carboxylic acid part, and this carbon is actually bound to one carbon, and then it's
double-bonded to one oxygen and it's single-bonded to another oxygen, and that also is four binding
sites.
So again, this is a general feature of chemistry.
It's not specific to organic chemistry, and it's not specific to biochemistry.
All carbon atoms in the universe have four binding sites that must be occupied.
Okay.
Now, in a monounsaturated fatty acid, you have two carbon atoms that are not saturated with
hydrogen, and because two are missing, you have a double-bond between these two carbon atoms that is
replacing the hydrogen atoms, right?
So this carbon, instead of bonding to hydrogen, is binding a second time to this carbon.
This carbon, instead of binding to its missing hydrogen is double bonding to this carbon.
That double-bond satisfies the fourth binding sites of both of these two carbons.
Now, because this double-bond, because of the distribution of mass and charge around it, the double-
bond introduces a kink into the molecule.
This is why polyunsaturated fats do not stack together as well as saturated fats, and that's why
they tend to be liquid at room temperature instead of solid, although if you put olive oil in the
refrigerator and you put corn oil, which is a seed oil, which is high in polyunsaturated fatty acids
in the refrigerator, you'll find that the corn oil does not solidify, but the olive oil does, and
that's because polyunsaturated fatty acids have more than one double-bond, which introduces more
than one kink, which introduces an even more complicated structure that packs together even less
well than the monounsaturated fatty acids, so they're even more liquid, even as you drop the
temperature down.
The problem with polyunsaturated fatty acids is that the carbon between two double-bonds, or rather
the ...
Chris Masterjohn: Two double bonds or rather the...
Yep.
So, the carbon between...
Oh, right.
This carbon right here, sorry.
So, you take one double bond, that's right here.
You take the second double bond, that's right here.
It's the carbon that is between those two double bonds that is destabilized and will easily
peroxidize, which means that it gets oxidized, oxygen in the air then binds to it, turns it into a
lipid peroxide.
And that can either induce a chain reaction where it now becomes an oxidant that oxidizes the
polyunsaturated fatty acids that are next to it, or it can fragment into something like
malondialdehyde and 4-hydroxynonenal that can leave a cell membrane and rummage through the rest of
the cell and cause damage.
You go on a rampage and cause damage.
In a little more detail, we have simplified this molecule to show two double-bonded carbons by the
double lines.
By inference, every point between a line is a carbon in this simplified model.
And what we're showing is that this carbon up here between these two double-bonded carbons is the
one vulnerable to oxidation and an oxidant can oxidize it and steal this hydrogen away, steal the
electron there.
Now, you have an unpaired electron in that carbon that's looking for something to bind to.
Oxygen comes in and binds to it, but that makes a lipid peroxyl radical that can stabilize by doing
this to another nearby fatty acid and take its hydrogen and turn into a lipid peroxide, or it can
destabilize from there and turn into something like malondialdehyde, which I would liken this to
breaking a bottle of glass.
You had something that was delicate and fragile but useful.
You broke it into shards, and now instead of being something that's useful, it's now something
that's harmful.
And this is like a shard of glass that can spread all over the place and damage whatever it comes
into contact with, such as your foot if you're walking around the house.
Now, the role of vitamin E comes in to break what's known as the lipid peroxidation chain reaction.
So, if you have a bunch of polyunsaturated fatty acids or PUFAs in the cell membrane, you have an
oxidant that can oxidize it, that is called initiation.
So, let's say you had a hydroxyl radical, it would take this hydrogen and become water with it, but
now you've oxidized this and you've made this a lipid radical.
That lipid radical will now look for something else to oxidize.
And the most likely thing it'll oxidize is a nearby PUFA in the membrane, another one, that restarts
this process.
It takes the hydrogen and the associated electron away.
Rather than becoming water, it becomes a lipid peroxide, but it's generated a new lipid peroxyl
radical, which...
excuse me, a new lipid radical, which then interacts with oxygen to become a lipid peroxyl radical,
oxidizes the new PUFA, generates one more lipid peroxide itself, but the new PUFA it oxides becomes
a lipid radical.
And this just operates in an endless circle until all the PUFAs in the membrane are destroyed.
And so, that's why you have something like in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, where
you have a defect in the recycling of glutathione secondary to a defect in the pentose phosphate
pathway to generate NADPH, which is a derivative of the vitamin B3 or niacin, which recycles
glutathione using a riboflavin-dependent enzyme glutathione reductase.
If you compromise that process, you compromise the recycling of vitamin E through vitamin C through
glutathione.
And what happens is hemolytic anemia, because if you peroxidize all the cell membranes in a lipid
peroxidation chain reaction in the cell membrane, the membrane will fall apart.
It's dead.
It just falls apart, and that can happen anywhere.
But in a red blood cell, that means the cell membrane falls apart, the contents spill out, that
gives you...
And now, you've destroyed your red blood cells, so you have anemia, because anemia doesn't mean iron
deficiency.
It means, A, absence of eme, blood, ia, condition of an absence of blood, right?
And so, hemolytic anemia is a subvariant of anemia that has nothing to do with iron deficiency and
has to do with peroxidation of the cell membrane.
Now, vitamin E is known as a chain-breaking antioxidant.
Contrary to the assertions of Fleetwood Mac, you can break the chain reaction with vitamin E.
However, vitamin E does not break the initiation part.
It breaks the propagation step.
And the reason is that vitamin E is 1000 times more reactive towards lipid peroxyl radicals than
other PUFAs are.
And so, if you have enough vitamin E in the cell membrane, you will break the chain, and you'll stop
the propagation step.
But you can't do anything to stop the initiation reaction because vitamin E is situated in the
membrane.
Both its position in the membrane and its reactivity prevent it from stopping a water-soluble
oxidant from reaching the edge of the membrane and oxidizing a new PUFA.
It is only is good at stopping lipid peroxyl radicals from oxidizing other PUFAs in the cell
membrane.
So, what that means is that your production of oxidants, your water-soluble antioxidant protection
and having the right amount of PUFA in the cell membrane cannot be replaced by having vitamin E.
And what that means is that you do need more vitamin E when you have more PUFA, but vitamin E can
never, ever, ever, ever, ever, ever, ever protect you against consuming too much PUFA.
And so, you want the right amount of PUFA, but you don't want any more than that in your cell
membranes because if it is increasing in the cell membrane in response to diet beyond its utility,
all it's doing is providing an oxidative liability.
Now, PUFAs don't cause oxidative stress, they are vulnerable to oxidative stress.
And one of the problems in looking at the research is that you could do a short-term study that
shows benefits of PUFA and no harms by providing the PUFAs in a context that does not have any
serious oxidative stress.
The problem is, that as you age, you develop more and more oxidative stress and have more and more
demands on your antioxidant protection.
And circumstantially, you will come into conditions of elevated oxidative stress.
Some of those might be semi-permanent.
For example, you became mercury toxic.
Others may be very transient, for example, you got sick, but you will come into contact with
oxidative stress as a guarantee over the course of your life.
And so, it does not make sense to excessively build up oxidative liabilities in your body just
because someone did a two -week study showing that you can reduce liver fat by eating sunflower oil.
All right?
So that's the context.
And that context is very important for understanding the limitations of the studies, which is part
of why there's so much controversy on it because there is a lot of conflicting evidence about the
clinical impact of eating vegetable oils.
And I've analyzed them elsewhere.
I'll link in the description.
I'm not going to redo my analysis of that issue here, but I am going to say that you cannot properly
understand the research if you don't understand the fact that having an oxidative liability is
different from having an acute cause of oxidative stress.
PUFAs are an oxidative liability.
They are not the acute cause of oxidative stress.
And if you want to know what happens when you have conditional liabilities in excess on your balance
sheet, look at all the bank failures that have taken place this year.
Why did they happen?
Well, because someone did a study of stress testing banks years ago, that showed that you can raise
interest rates from this to this and that's not going to cause banks to fail.
And so, some banks said, "Well, we can just be concerned about our short-term profit because these
don't cause us harm to buy all these interest rate risk assets because it doesn't cause harm until
it does." But then, when this particular stress is placed on the system, the bank implodes, right?
So, this is not different from that.
You have to consider that PUFAs from seed oils are an oxidative liability under conditions of
oxidative stress.
They may not cause you harm right now, but you can spend years increasing the saturation of your
tissues with PUFAs by eating a high-PUFA diet.
And the chickens may come home to roost at the end of the day, but the difference with the bank
analogy is that we very much know the exact types of stress that make PUFAs an oxidative liability.
And we know that they will happen, right?
Getting sick, getting nutrient deficiencies, getting heavy metal toxicity and the cumulative stress
of aging, so your oxidative stress will increase in the future.
I'm not saying that you can't decrease it now by eating better, by living better, et cetera, it's
just as a function of age, you will eventually accumulate enough stress in your system that your
level of oxidative stress increases.
And at some point, you go beyond the threshold where the accumulation of PUFAs as a liability
manifests.
Now, that was all from lesson two.
Lesson four is the other relevant lesson.
And what I would add here...
Oh, this is a useful point.
The way that vitamin E prevents a lipid peroxidation chain reaction is to turn an oxidized PUFA into
a lipid peroxide.
So, vitamin E creates one lipid peroxide to avoid the lipid peroxidation chain reaction from causing
many lipid peroxides.
This just goes back to the point that you cannot fully protect against excess PUFA with vitamin E
because vitamin E, in a best-case scenario, makes each one oxidant generate one lipid peroxide
instead of many, which means that if you have more oxidants or you have more PUFAs, you get more
lipid peroxides, and vitamin E makes that happen in order to avert a worse scenario of many lipid
peroxides in a chain reaction.
So, get it out of your head that vitamin E protects you from PUFA.
Vitamin E protects you from the worst-case scenario of PUFA.
Now interestingly, in the DRI for vitamin E, the dietary reference intakes, they said the following:
"Vitamin E requirements have been reported to increase when intakes of polyunsaturated fatty acids
are increased.
Based on these data, it was suggested that a ratio of at least 0.4 milligrams of alpha-tocopherol
per gram of PUFA should be consumed.
However, the method of determining the vitamin E requirement generated by PUFA intake is not
universally accepted because the amount of vitamin E required to stabilize PUFAs and tissues is
influenced to a greater extent by their degree of unsaturation than by their mass." What that means
is that highly unsaturated fatty acids that are, for example, arachidonic acid, DHA and EPA, are
more vulnerable to oxidation than the ALA in flax oil or the linoleic acid in corn oil.
All that means is that the degree to which you need vitamin E to stabilize PUFA is greater than what
those studies suggested because those studies were based on alpha-tocopherol to protect you against
linoleic acid, right?
So, this does not mitigate the point.
It exacerbates the point.
And notice they say it's not universally agreed on.
Not the principle.
They don't say the principle is not universally agreed on.
They say that the method of determining the amount of vitamin E you need per gram of PUFA is not
universally accepted.
I mean, nothing's universally accepted in science.
That's not very interesting.
But notice that what they're saying is not universally accepted.
It's not the principle that you need more vitamin E when you get more PUFA.
It is the method of determining the amount you need.
"Moreover, PUFAs are not deposited in the tissues in the same proportions that they occur in the
diet." So you would have to have some adjustment factor for...
It's not really per dietary amount, it's per amount in your tissues.
But that point actually is not that powerful.
It's actually a weak point because the turnover of PUFA is a lot higher than the turnover...
excuse me, turnover of vitamin E is a lot higher than the turnover of PUFA.
Actually, it's not even the amount deposited in the tissues that you want to know.
It's really the turnover rate of the vitamin E because of the tissue saturation that was induced by
the diet.
Really, what you want is dietary studies that are long-term and really the long-term stuff is
largely...
In terms of lifelong, you're only going to find that in animals and the only long-term dietary study
in humans is really limited to the LA Veterans Administration Hospital study.
They go on to say finally, "Dietary PUFAs are modified by elongation and desaturation and are
catabolized to various degrees depending on energy status." And then, the final point is,
"Although," and I'm quoting, "Although it is clear that the relationship between dietary PUFA and
vitamin E needs is not simple, high-PUFA intakes should certainly be accompanied by increased
vitamin E intakes." Now, the end result of this was they didn't factor this into the DRI at all
because they couldn't agree on the quantitative determination of the requirement per gram of PUFA,
right?
So, if you don't read the DRI report, what you don't find is that "certainly." How often do you see
scientists say this?
Totally unhedged.
"Certainly," you have more PUFA, you need more vitamin E.
This manifests nowhere in the numbers and tables that are used to calculate the Daily Values that
the Registered Dietitians are using to look at people's intake.
It factors nowhere.
You have to read the report to see this, okay?
Now, when you look at different oils, what you find is that seed oils such as corn oil are not
terrible as a source of vitamin E even normalized to milligrams, vitamin E per gram PUFA, right?
Corn oil still outshines regular commercial butter as a source of vitamin E.
Red palm oil, where you really see this shine is that wheat germ oil looks really good when you
don't take into account its PUFA on the left.
But when you do, all of a sudden it's massively outshined by red palm oil, and it doesn't even look
that much better than the other fats.
Olive oil looks way behind wheat germ oil when you don't adjust for PUFA, but actually olive oil
looks fairly competitive with wheat germ oil, and it's even better than corn oil when you do take
into account per gram PUFA.
The DRI tables don't point you in the direction of the graph on the right.
But when you read the DRI report, it says certainly you want to look at the graph on the right
instead of the graph on the left.
And so, the principle is true that something with more vitamin E per gram PUFA is what you want.
That makes palm oil look excellent, and it really diminishes the importance of wheat germ oil, but
it still doesn't make corn oil look that bad.
One of the points I make in this lesson is that plants need vitamin E to protect them against
photosynthesis.
And as a result, green leaves are extremely high in their vitamin E-to-PUFA ratio.
And as a result, animals that eat green leaves have much better vitamin E-to-PUFA ratios than
animals that eat corn or other grains.
And if you look at grass-fed beef, it's generally 1.3- to 5.4-fold higher in vitamin E than grain-
fed beef.
And if you put grass-fed butter in here, it's slightly better than olive oil, and it is not a lot
better, but it is better than corn oil.
So, the reason that corn oil looks better than average butter is because it's average butter, if you
have completely hay-fed butter, it's really pathetic.
So, butter is very dependent on what the animal is eating.
And when the animal is eating grass, this looks better than corn oil.
But what you have to go back to is the point that I made at the beginning, which is that vitamin E
cannot protect you against all the harms of PUFA.
And so, because of that, that's why you don't want to eat corn oil.
Now, there are secondary points such as, seed oils have to be extracted using chemical solvents, and
there's always traces of chemical solvents such as hexane left in the food, and these are toxic.
The toxicity is obviously low enough that no one is getting acute solvent toxicity from eating
vegetable oil, but you could say, "Well, it's an added source of oxidative stress." In the grand
scheme of things, how much does it play a role in the totality of oxidative stress?
I don't know.
There's not a good clinical demonstration of the harms of residual solvents in these oils, but why
would you want to eat residual solvents in your oils, right?
And I think the real big issue is that the stress that causes the PUFAs to eventually manifest as
oxidative liabilities is going to be partly made worse over time by the accumulation of chemical
solvents.
It's just that the real problem is the oxidative liability.
Oxidative stress increases with aging.
You know you will age, right?
Pretend that you could go back in a time machine, and you were reading all the news about the bank
failures that happened recently, and you can go back and you're consulted on "with interest rates of
this and knowing what will happen in the future like, should the balance sheet of this bank be the
70% interest rate risk assets?" What are you going to do?
You're going to say, "Oh no, I know the future, so I'm not going to load up on things that are not
going to harm me now, but are probably going to harm me later." I think you should take this very
similar with the exception that we really know how human physiology works, whereas these other
things are economics, which is a less hard science than nutrition, believe it or not, and certainly
than biology.
Maybe a physicist is going to slam their head at me calling biology a hard science, but it's a hard
enough science that we know some basic principles will be true about the course of physiological
events as we age, and we know that PUFAs are an oxidative liability.
I mean, that's the central reason why you want to moderate them by not consuming a lot of seed oils.
So, that is my answer.
Thank you very much, Dora, for that question.
