Are you avoiding iron-rich foods because you're afraid that they're bad for you?
Here's why you probably don't need to care.
Hi.
I'm Dr.
Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com.
And this is Chris Masterjohn Lite, where the name of the game is "Details?
Shmeetails.
Just tell me what works!" And today we're going to talk about why, if you don't have a genetic
predisposition to accumulate too much iron, you probably do not need to be paying any attention to
avoiding iron-rich foods.
And this comes from someone who has a genetic predisposition to absorb too much iron, and as you'll
see shortly, eats way more than the RDA for iron.
Okay, so first of all, our bodies have very precise homeostatic machinery to maintain normal levels
of iron.
When we eat too much iron, our body stops absorbing the iron.
Our body shuttles that iron into a compound called ferritin that locks it away and prevents it from
having access to any places where it might cause trouble.
Now, some of us, and it's not insignificant by any means, this includes me, some of us have genetic
predispositions to absorb too much iron.
I'll link in the description of this video to a previous one that I made on how to know if those
genetics apply to you.
There are some rare genetics that aren't covered in any of the major testing that we might not know
about, and so it's always important to test your iron status at least once in order to know whether
you might, might have a problem that you couldn't discover with genetic testing.
But let's say that you don't have that problem.
Should you worry about too much iron in certain specific foods like red meat, or like legumes, or
like green vegetables, or like this whole-food supplement that you were taking as a probiotic?
The answer is no because that iron is simply going to be—is simply not going to be absorbed, and to
the extent some of it is, it'll be locked away in the right place.
Now, let's look at my results, being homozygous for the H63D allele for the hemochromatosis genes.
That is the less severe of the two major alleles that are associated, the major genetic variations
that are associated with hemochromatosis.
I am quite vulnerable to developing iron overload if I do not give blood over the course of years.
But I want to show you now my iron intake as judged by Cronometer and my iron lab results in the
context of donating blood on an average of once a year over the last decade.
So first of all, let's take a look at Cronometer.
If you go into this representative example of what I was eating in the months leading up to my lab
results, we can go to targets, and we can scroll down until we find the minerals, and then we can
look at the iron.
The iron is shown there in red, and it says that I'm consuming 54 milligrams against a daily value
of 8 milligrams, so I'm getting almost 7 times what I need, according to Cronometer.
Now let's go back and take a look at where those things come from.
So, a lot of it was coming from plant foods, and so there's iron in the rice, there's iron in the
lentils, there's iron in the vegetables, but 10 ounces of sirloin steak per day is also where that
iron is coming from.
We can go and look at that steak, we can go to view more details, and we can see how much iron it's
providing.
If we scroll down to minerals, we see that the steak itself only provides half the daily value.
A lot of people are avoiding steak on the basis of its high iron content, but I'm eating 10 ounces
of steak a day in this diet, and it's providing less than a tenth of my total iron and less than
half of the daily value.
So a lot more is coming from the plant foods, and you can say, "Well, okay Dr.
Masterjohn, but we're really concerned about the heme in the meat because that's more easily
absorbed." Well, okay, but exactly how many ounces of red meat are you afraid of?
Because I was eating 10 ounces a day, and there's a lot of people out there who would say that
that's excessive, and this is in the context of me, who's genetically predisposed to overaccumulate
iron.
Now let's take a look at my lab work.
So here are my iron results after several months of consuming the diet that I just showed you.
And what it shows is that my iron is well within the normal range.
My iron saturation is not only in the normal range, but it's at the bottom of what I advocate as the
physiologically healthful range of 30-40%.
It's at 31%.
My serum ferritin is at what I would consider a healthy level, generally between 60 and 150.
My transferrin can be used to calculate my transferrin saturation as described in the previous
episode, and that puts me at 30%, which is very close to my iron saturation of 31% and again is at
the bottom of what I consider the physiologically healthful range.
So for me, I believe my iron is in kept in check because, number one, the diversity of foods in my
diet provides plenty of things, plenty of natural iron absorption inhibitors in the foods alongside
the iron that's in my diet because of the plant foods.
But also, my iron doesn't get out of control unless I go years without donating blood, and because
I'm on the background of donating blood about once a year, I can eat all the red meat that I want
and all the iron-rich plant foods that I want.
My iron is not getting out of control.
If you do not have the genetic predisposition to iron overload, if you do not have blood work
showing iron overload, if you do not have a medical reason from your doctor specific to you that
overrides anything I'm saying in this video, then you probably don't need to be avoiding iron,
whether it comes from red meat, or from vegetables, or from legumes, or from a natural whole-food
supplement that you found that you were worried about because of the iron contained therein.
The audio of this episode was enhanced and post-processed by Bob Davodian of Taurean Mixing.
You can find more of his work at taureanonlinemixing.com.
This episode is brought to you by Testing Nutritional Status: The Ultimate Cheat Sheet.
Everything you could ever need to know to optimize your nutrition all in one place.
Easier to find and use than ever before.
Get your copy at chrismasterjohnphd.com/cheatsheet.
Use the code LITE5, that's all capitals, L-I-T-E, and the number 5.
LITE5 to get $5 off.
All right, I hope you found this useful.
Signing off, this is Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com.
This has been Chris Masterjohn Lite.
And I will see you in the next episode.
