Pamela Schoenfeld says, "You previously talked about the need for arachidonic acid and at the same
time lowering intake of EPA to help reduce immune reactions to food.
What if someone feels that they don't tolerate eggs at all and does not eat liver?
Does a supplement with GLA help?
Desiccated liver capsules could be helpful, but can you suggest how many per day would be needed?
Also what foods are high in arachidonic acid, but this person also has a high need for choline.
8 egg yolks per your choline calculator.
Could a low intake of choline contribute in any way to immune reactions, to a wide range of foods.
This individual has celiac as well, but has been strictly avoiding gluten." Okay.
So if they have celiac, they probably have a pro-inflammatory milieu in the gut.
So that's certainly true.
I guess the question would be, underlying that, could this person not have enough arachidonic acid?
So apart from liver and egg yolks, I think that it is very difficult to get enough arachidonic acid
from food.
Yes, GLA might help, but there's actually arachidonic acid supplements.
And for the vegans out there, I don't know if the production process is strictly vegan, but they are
derived from a specific mushroom and you can get them on Amazon.
So I think supplementing with arachidonic acid is probably the most direct way to do that.
And then evening primrose or a barrage oil could help provide precursors to arachidonic acid.
Desiccated liver capsules, off the top of my head, I'm not sure how many would be needed.
Generally, six to nine a day equals four ounces per week, but I'm not sure if the desiccating
process alters the ratio of arachidonic acid to some other nutrients.
So off the top of my head, I'm not sure.
And I think it's probably wise to see if any given manufacturer actually has arachidonic acid data
on their liver capsules.
The high need for choline, I have the choline database that is searchable by foods.
I'll put that in the show notes here.
But if someone can't get enough choline from choline, then I think betaine (trimethylglycine or TMG)
is certainly an option.
And I think that takes care of a lot of issues.
Just 500 milligrams of TMG will really cut into that egg yolk worth of choline requirement.
Well, Pam, I hope that helps.
Thank you for your question.
