This is how GABA can help you face your fears.
Hi.
I'm Dr.
Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com.
And this is Chris Masterjohn Lite, where the name of the game is "Details?
Shmeetails.
Just tell me what works!" And today we're going to talk about facing your fears with GABA.
GABA is an inhibitory neurotransmitter, which means that it slows down, or shuts off, or prevents
from firing, neurons in your brain, and it's available as a dietary supplement.
In the last episode, I talked about how 800 milligrams of GABA has been used to enhance decision-
making under pressure.
In this episode I want to talk about a study that showed that 100 milligrams of GABA could reduce
anxiety and help people face their fears with less of a negative impact on their stress response.
So, in this study, which I'll link to in the description of the video, in this study they had
volunteers take 100 milligrams of GABA.
Generally you take GABA on an empty stomach, and you see the real impact of it in these studies is
looked at 60 minutes later.
And what they found was two things.
Number one, the brainwave pattern of these volunteers who took GABA compared to a placebo, the
brainwave pattern was one that you would expect from lower effort focus and less anxiety.
Then they had subjects who were afraid of heights, and they had them cross a long suspension bridge
so that they were walking exposed to, not just exposed to height but walking across this bridge so
that when they're in the middle of the bridge, they're sort of trapped in this high-anxiety, off-
the- ground position.
And what they found was that if they took the placebo instead of the GABA, their IgA in their
saliva, which is a part of the—which is an antibody made by your immune system that is considered
protective, so it's good to have a lot of this IgA in your saliva.
It means that your immune system is strong.
The IgA in their saliva if they got the placebo went down when they were on the suspension bridge,
meaning that their fear of heights was activated; that caused a stress response that tanked their
immunity.
But when they had the 100 milligrams of GABA first, their IgA in their saliva remained higher, which
means that they may still have been afraid of heights, but whatever that loop was, it didn't result
in the tanking of the immune system.
So, probably the GABA helped tame the fear response.
So, the fear is still there, but it tamed the stress response so that the stress response didn't get
out of hand and didn't tank the immune system.
So, if we generalize from this study, perhaps this means that if we're exposed not just to fear of
heights but the things that we're afraid of in general, if we need to face a tougher than normal
situation, a supplement of GABA might help us face that situation.
The last study I talked about in the last episode used 800 milligrams, so I would not be afraid to
go above 100 milligrams for this purpose, but 100 milligrams is what was used in the study, so I
would say 100 to 800 milligrams of GABA in the 30 to 60 minutes before you start facing something
that you're Signing off, this is Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com.
This has been Chris Masterjohn Lite, and
