This is more important than diet for insulin resistance.
It's more important than diet for visceral fat accumulation, and it sure as heck is more important
than diet when it comes down to overall mitochondrial function and the ability to produce energy.
If you had have told me that light was more important than diet 10 years ago, I probably would have
laughed in your face.
No joke.
You've probably been told that metabolism is controlled by calories.
Maybe it's controlled by carbs, or then more recently we hear maybe it's controlled by hormones like
insulin and cortisol, which are very important.
But what if those hormones, what if those calories, what if those macronutrients were a little bit
more controlled by light and your actual mitochondria, the actual engines inside your cells that
decide whether you burn fat or store it?
They're directly responding to the light that's hitting your eyes and your skin.
And this is where things get totally wild because there's a brand new wave of research that shows
that insulin resistance may not just be a food problem, and that's what we're going to cover today.
It's more of a signal problem, which is wild, but it actually makes sense because light is one of
the strongest signals that your body has ever evolved to understand.
Way stronger than food.
So what we're going to do in this video is cover a few things.
We're going to talk about what this new body of research is first and what the study actually
uncovered specifically about light and mitochondrial metabolism.
And then secondly, we're going to get into a really wild area of science.
So buckle in for this one, okay?
This is bordering on quantum biology stuff, and that's changing how we look at mitochondria and
insulin resistance forever.
Once you see it, you cannot unsee it.
Thirdly, we're going to talk about practical things that you can do, practical behaviors, exposures
that you can use today.
Also, why some foods and habits work better when they're timed appropriately with light.
I also have an interesting trick that I learned from a UVB light researcher that allows you to
absorb more light and get more vitamin D.
It's an interesting timing trick, and it needs a little bit of information laid up front before so
that it makes sense.
But there's an interesting part about nighttime light and insulin resistance and I can almost
guarantee you've never heard it before.
It actually may explain why you're doing everything right but still kind of struggling a little bit
metabolically.
Light is not just circadian.
It is hardcore metabolic.
Most people think that light just kind of sets your sleep-wake cycle.
That's like 2021 science, right?
And the whole thing is true but it's definitely surface level because at the deeper biological
level, light is a metabolic signal.
You see, your mitochondria are not just reacting to hormones that respond to light.
They are literally directly light responsive organelles.
This is newer stuff, right?
Some people have been talking about it and it was fringe but now we have a review that was published
in the Journal of Clinical Medicine that looked at how different wavelengths of light affect
mitochondrial function.
Okay, specifically looking at red and near infrared light in this case.
But the main key here is that they focused on something called cytochrome c oxidase which is the
final complex of the electron transport chain in the mitochondria.
So this part of the mitochondria, this enzyme, it's the final step of cellular energy production.
And it's the part that allows oxygen to be used to ultimately create ATP which is our energy
currency.
They found something super remarkable with this.
They found that cytochrome c oxidase actually absorbs red and near infrared light directly.
This means that light isn't just telling your brain what time it is.
Now we've kind of known part of this but what we're seeing now is that light is literally
interacting with the energy producing machinery inside your cells.
When this enzyme absorbs light, its redox state changes which means that electron flow improves.
Electrons flow through the mitochondria make energy better.
What really happens when electron flow improves?
We have an increase in ATP production, our membrane potential improves, we have less electron
leakage and therefore less reactive oxygen species becoming chaotic.
They're more controlled, so we have less oxidative stress.
In fact, this entire process has a name.
You've heard me talk about it before.
It's called photobiomodulation, but it goes deeper.
So, if we look at it in simple terms, what photobiomodulation actually is, light makes mitochondria
run cleaner and more efficiently.
Almost like we're designed to have light.
Why this matters for fat loss and insulin resistance is probably why you're here, and that's the
most important thing to cover today because when mitochondria leak electrons because they don't get
right the right light, they produce excessive oxidative stress.
That itself directly interferes with glucose oxidation.
So, insulin resistance, a lot of times, believe it or not, is not a glucose problem.
It is a problem with how we handle the electrons at the very core level.
So, if you keep that in mind, we'll come back to it in a second because I want to connect this to
why nighttime light, specifically, worsens insulin sensitivity, even if your diet was spot-on smack-
dab perfect.
We have to start at the beginning of the day, which is something that we've talked about before in
other videos, and that's morning light, right?
There is a reason that humans instinctively feel better in morning sun.
It is doing something different.
There was a 2023 study in Nutrients analyzed human trials looking at morning bright light exposure.
And they looked at people with seasonal affective disorder where circadian timing is delayed,
morning light at about 2,500 lux increased oxygen consumption and energy expenditure.
There were a bunch of studies that even showed that weight loss had occurred and mood improved,
which we're not too surprised about, but the fact that people are literally burning more calories
just by getting morning sun.
This was not like a psychological thing.
There was something that was happening at the actual core level.
The theory is that morning light shifts serotonin and melatonin signaling, so which then changes
appetite and all that stuff, right?
Your appetite regulation, your activity levels, your metabolic behavior.
But what we found now is that there were direct metabolic effects, not just circadian related like,
"Hey, I'm going to go outside and burn more calories like everyone says." This is where things get a
little frustrating because you get people like, "Yeah, of course, when you get morning light, it
just means you're you're outside and you're more active, so you're burning more calories." Ladies
and gentlemen, there's some other stuff going on here.
It's not just about what it's doing to your overall activity level.
There were literal changes in energy expenditure at a cellular level.
In fact, what they found is that repeated morning light exposure in overweight people consistently
lowered body fat, it lowered overall body weight, and it consistently reduced appetite.
And then of course, when it was combined with exercise, fat loss was even greater than exercise
alone.
Okay, calories being equal, nothing else changing in terms of that, light simply changed how the
body used energy.
Then of course, morning light is going to consistently improve sleep quality.
And of course, better sleep is going to mean better insulin sensitivity the next day because we have
immediate effects.
One night of poor sleep messes up your insulin sensitivity.
Did you know that?
Not trying to scare you, but if you have a crummy night of sleep, you do not use glucose well the
next day.
You become temporarily insulin resistant.
Yes, you can be insulin resistant overnight.
It will reverse, but you will be insulin resistant that day.
So now we have two layers.
We have direct mitochondrial effects and indirect hormonal and activity effects.
But wait until you hear about what happens when we actually reverse this and expose the body to
light at night.
This is what's kind of freaky.
There's this thing that's called the redox, okay?
This is going to become a little bit more like quantum biology type stuff because mitochondria don't
just produce ATP, they manage something called the redox balance, okay?
And this is the controlled movement of electrons.
If we look at a study in Frontiers in Neuroscience, it took a look at animals and exposed them to
chronic red and near infrared light and it measured that cytochrome c oxidase activity, basically
how their mitochondria was functioning.
With this, they found increased enzyme activity, better electron coupling efficiency, higher ATP
output, and lower oxidative stress like reactive oxygen species leakage.
The mitochondria wasted less energy and produced less oxidative damage.
This is where biologists are starting to use language that overlaps with physics.
Cuz mitochondrial function depends on how electrons are moving through the proteins.
So, light changes the energy state of the electrons that we get from food.
When we eat food, it turns into electrons.
So, yes, this starts to edge into like quantum stuff a little bit, but you don't really need to
think of it as mystical.
We're not going into like woo-woo quantum stuff.
We're more like real quantum stuff that's like right here, right now.
So, think of it this way.
Your mitochondria are tiny little electrical circuits, okay?
So, they have all this electricity buzzing through them, and light changes the voltage, okay?
Changes the how much power and voltage is sort of humming in this.
Older or metabolically damaged mitochondria improved a bunch when they saw light because they had
more dysfunction to correct.
And that explains why insulin resistance improves so much in some people when they start fixing
their sleep and start getting sunlight exposure.
It's not just circadian.
I mean, cuz this happens in the studies before they even change their diet.
This might be something that helps you out a little bit as even a takeaway or something that you
could try.
I had an interesting guest on my channel not that long ago.
He was a an expert in UVA and UVB light.
They have an interesting thing that's called MitoLux.
So, I pop the link down below if you want to check that out.
It's something that I've used if I can't get actual sunlight for a while because this thing has UVA,
UVB, and red light in it, so you're getting the full spectrum of the sun.
It's not just about using red light.
I'm all for red light, but you do need to actually get a vitamin D light, a light that helps get you
vitamin D, helps the body start that process of making vitamin D.
So, I put a link down below for MitoLux.
That's for a special discount off their MitoLux sun lamp.
They have a few different options.
They have their MitoLux light, so it's a little bit of a less expensive option.
They have a a less settings, but then they go all the way up.
They have a bunch of different options.
So, that link down below is for a light that is basically called a better than sun lamp because
you're getting concentrated doses of the sun.
So much so, you should wear sunglasses, only do it for a small amount of time.
Unlike red light where you should still wear glasses, but you could expose yourself for a long
period of time.
So, that link is down below.
They're an interesting company.
At the very least, check them out and read up on it because they're doing some cool stuff and it's
what we need to start seeing rather than just the traditional lighting we're using nowadays.
Now, we flip the coin and look at where light can be problematic.
There was a PNAS study that had adults sleep under dim light or room light.
So, under three lux or 100 lux.
And after just one night of room light while they slept, their heart rate increased, their
parasympathetic, their calming activity, like it dropped, and their insulin resistance worsened the
next morning.
Same exact diet, same exact calories, but different light.
Okay?
We can probably guess what's going on here, but this is not just melatonin stuff.
Okay?
Melatonin is a sleep hormone, but melatonin is actually a mitochondrial antioxidant.
And that's where people miss the point.
Melatonin scavenges reactive oxygen species and it helps antioxidant enzymes like superoxide
dismutase and glutathione do their job.
So, if we suppress melatonin with a light at night, mitochondria actually accumulate more oxidative
stress and glucose oxidation becomes really bad.
So, your insulin sensitivity drops, you basically become insulin resistant.
So, someone can be eating a perfect diet, but if they sleep with light exposure, their mitochondria
literally cannot process glucose properly the next morning, even if they're sleeping.
I didn't understand the magnitude of this, but there's a simple intervention and some of it's kind
of obvious, right?
Like just sleep in a dark room, but there was a study in the Journal of Adolescent Health showed
that just blocking blue light for a little bit prevented melatonin suppression and reduced alertness
from evening LED screens.
So, just even like 50% reduction.
So, mitochondrial repair can actually happen overnight if you block the blue light.
So, it's not just about how you sleep, it's about what's happening at the mitochondrial level.
But, this gets even deeper because there was a cell metabolism study that looked at mice under
summer, winter, and equinox day lengths without changing calories, simply changing the light altered
their fat accumulation, their liver triglycerides, and their lipid metabolism rhythms.
So, how their HDL and LDL did certain things.
Peripheral clock genes in their liver, their muscle, and their fat tissue changed their timing.
And the mitochondria are regulated by those peripheral clocks.
They found that shorter daylight compressed their feeding windows and actually improved rhythmic fat
metabolism.
Your body is quite programmed to metabolize food differently depending on the day length.
This means that metabolism is not just what you eat, it's when you eat, but more importantly, what
time your body thinks it is.
Artificial light at night completely confuses that signal.
So, you can see just how important all of this is.
But, now I want to get into the fat loss piece.
Because there was a trial in Obesity Facts that tested morning bright light in overweight people.
In just 3 weeks, their fat mass decreased and their appetite decreased even when weight didn't
dramatically changed.
So, their body composition had made a pretty robust shift.
That is a mitochondrial outcome because the mitochondria changed and it's become better at utilizing
fat.
Fat oxidation improved.
Now, before we get into the practical takeaways, I learned something very interesting from this UVA
UVB expert.
What was wild is that he explained that if you get red light specific and near infrared light in the
morning, it actually primes your body to absorb more of the UVA and UVB light without getting a
sunburn or without the stress.
So, the mitochondrial preparation.
So, what you want to do is even if you cannot get morning sun, if you can get a little bit of
morning red light or near infrared light, it's going to make it so that if you do go out in the sun
later, you literally have less risk of getting a sunburn.
You prime your mitochondria to be prepared to handle the oxidative stress of the sun and the actual
sun damage.
It blew my mind.
It also preps your body's systems to be able to take the vitamin D, take the actual components from
the sun and the UVA UVB UVB light and make vitamin D more efficiently.
This is so wild and it makes it so that you can do the most with the least.
So that morning red light and morning near for red light, which is what you get from the sun when
it's low or from a lamp, is everything.
Here's what things boil down to in terms of takeaways.
Your mitochondria are signal driven energy processors and light is the strongest signal they
probably understand, at least now based on the research.
So if you want better metabolic health, so get outside early after waking, okay?
You just need 5 or 10 minutes realistically.
That's all you need, okay?
Consistency is going to be the most important thing.
And even if you're still going to scroll your phone cuz I know it's going to happen, do it outside.
Because the lumens that you're getting, the red light, the near infrared light, this is very
important.
It's going to beat like long occasional exposure.
Dim the lights down after sunset.
That's super important.
We want to avoid sleeping with any kind of light.
Any kind of light is going to reduce that oxidative stress buffering effect.
And block the blue light and reduce the phone dimness, okay?
You want to do that as much as you can.
Also try taking trimethylglycine, TMG, anywhere from 1 to 4 g of trimethylglycine.
Trimethylglycine is a methyl donor, which means that it is donating a methyl group and reducing
homocysteine, ultimately lowering inflammation and lowering that extra oxidative stress that allows
glucose to be burned better.
Okay, so it's making the system run a little bit more seamlessly.
Another thing you could take, you could try 400 mg of carnosine, okay?
Carnosine is very important for a number of different pathways related to insulin resistance, okay?
Essentially, you're making it your body is in a lower inflamed state, so you're able to actually
utilize glucose and the signals and the insulin receptor signals are working better.
Having a little bit of carbohydrates at night is also hugely beneficial, something I talk about all
the time.
A small amount, 30-50 grams, is going to help you get into that parasympathetic tone, lower the
cortisol, okay?
The next thing that you can do is literally stand on some grass.
Grounding has a big effect on lowering cortisol.
And we see it in salivary cortisol testing.
So, this can have a huge impact on melatonin secretion and how you ultimately sleep.
Now, I did another video talking about another compound that is really, really interesting and
paving the way with a lot of research right now.
One of the most fascinating things I've seen is 3 grams of this stuff can literally make you sleep
through the night and makes a huge difference in terms of how often you get up to pee.
So, I put that that link right here for you to check that video out.
It's very interesting and teaches you how to use it.
