If you drink coffee like your life depended on it, then this video is for you.
Hi.
I'm Dr.
Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com, and you're watching Chris Masterjohn Lite where the name
of the game is, Details?
Shmeetails.
Just tell me what works!
And today we're going to talk about how to know if coffee could save your life.
Coffee works by inhibiting the action of a chemical called adenosine.
Adenosine makes us sleepy.
When we get tired as we progress through the day, it's because adenosine accumulates.
And when we wake up feeling refreshed it's because we cleared adenosine while we were sleeping.
But there's a little bit of adenosine leftover, and when we drink coffee the caffeine inhibits it
and that's what gives us the boost.
But adenosine doesn't just make us tired, it also contributes to aging by shortening something
called telomeres.
Telomeres are little tiny caps on the ends of our chromosomes, the units that contain our DNA.
And as our cells replicate, the more and more as we age, they get shorter and shorter.
And as the telomeres shorten, our cells lose their ability to protect our DNA and to stay young and
healthy.
Now most of us have the ability to control adenosine levels to just what they should be.
But I found out yesterday morning that I'm one of seven percent in the world's population who have a
decreased ability to clear adenosine from my system.
I thought that was fascinating because I've done a lot of experimentation with and without coffee in
my life, and I've consistently found that I feel a lot better, I'm happier, I have a better mood
when coffee is in my life.
But people like me, who have a decreased ability to clear adenosine from their systems, also have
shorter telomeres.
And that means that we age more rapidly.
You would think that coffee, because it inhibits adenosine, might be able to make us live longer.
Well guess what?
People who drink more caffeinated coffee have longer telomeres, which suggests that they age more
gracefully and may be able to live longer.
In fact, people who drink more coffee live longer.
Now none of this proves, as a fact, that if you have trouble clearing adenosine from your system,
you will live longer if you drink coffee.
But it certainly might mean that.
And hey coffee tastes good and it makes you feel good, so it's a scientific hypothesis that I kind
of like.
Now, how do you figure out if you're in that seven percent of the world's population like I am?
Well if you have 23andme, I can show you how right now.
What you want to search for in your 23andme is Rs73598374.
Double-click on the RS number, and select copy.
In your 23andme, go to tools, browse raw data, then paste the RS number and search.
When you see your genotype, it should say either CC or CT.
If you have a T there, that means you have trouble clearing adenosine from your system.
T is for trouble.
If you're 23andme data shows that you have T for trouble, then coffee may just save your life.
All right, I hope you found this useful.
Signing off, this is Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com.
Don't forget to thank me when you turn a hundred.
