here might be some negative feedback for more incoming..." No, Tracey, I see what you're saying, but
I don't think that's the case.
So as Pippa had brought up originally, the issue is that so generally, if there's a buildup in
citric acid cycle metabolites because you have a lot of carbs in the fed state, what that is doing
is increasing cytosolic citrate and also increasing mitochondrial citrate.
Actually forget the cytosolic citric.
The mitochondrial citrate is going to be one of the factors along with insulin that's going to shut
down the carnitine palmitoyltransferase (CPT) shuttle, which is the entry way for long chain fatty
acids and mitochondrion.
One of the reasons that MCT oil is ketogenic in the presence of carbs and insulin is because the
MCTs get into the mitochondrion without the need for the carnitine shuttle.
So the buildup of citric acid metabolites due to carbs, yes, will shut down the input of long-chain
fatty acids in the mitochondrion, but not the input of short- and medium-chain fatty acids.
And Pippa's saying "Yes, but won't it supply the oxaloacetate to allow the acetyl-CoA generated in
beta-oxidation from those MCTs to enter the citric acid cycle?" And yes, in principle oxaloacetate
does that, but I believe the answer is just, you can't make enough oxaloacetate under those
conditions fast enough, maybe partly due to limiting capacity of oxaloacetate and in general,
oxaloacetate production from pyruvate in general, and probably also due to the influence of insulin
shoving pyruvate towards being oxidized into acetyl-CoA.
Probably from both of those things, you can't make enough oxaloacetate fast enough to deal with that
acetyl-CoA load.
And remember it's not like there should be a situation other than this, where you would expect to
need to make that much oxaloacetate because generally when you don't have the carbs, you're not
trying to make oxaloacetate.
You're sending oxaloacetate to gluconeogenesis, and you're sending acetyl-CoA to ketogenesis.
Generally operating in one of those two states.
Either you have enough carbs and you replete the oxaloacetate, but your main thing you're doing with
carbs is burning them for energy, or you don't have enough carbs, and you're not even trying to
replete oxaloacetate, you're using it to make gluconeogenesis.
There really isn't a situation physiologically where you would want to take a carb load and mostly
make oxaloacetate from it.
And I guess that the exception is when you're dealing with medium-chain triglycerides, but obviously
we haven't evolved a need to specifically deal with that one exceptional situation where you have an
influx of medium-chain triglycerides with carbs.
Pacific Island diets have that and they have high-starch, high-coconut diet, but apparently the
Pacific Island diet doesn't cause a big enough problem to cause human mitochondria to evolve the
ability to suppress ketogenesis in response to eating starch with coconut.
And so if eating starch with coconut just isn't that harmful then there's no pressure to evolve an
exception to the rule of biochemistry that generally when you have a lot of carbs, you want to burn
them for energy and when you don't have a lot of carbs, you're using oxaloacetate up to make
glucose.
And there's never a situation where you have a lot of carbs and you're trying to mostly make
oxaloacetate with them.
So I hope that...
I think that answers it.
Actually, I'm very sure that answers the question, but hopefully it was clear enough.
I know that was very complicated.
