This is the best way to supplement with calcium.
Hi.
I'm Dr.
Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com, and this is Chris Masterjohn Lite, where the name of the
game is "Details?
Shmeetails.
Just tell me what works!" And today we're going to talk about supplementing with calcium.
Now, there's a lot of people out there in the alternative health world, the ancestral health world,
who are skeptical of calcium supplements.
Naturally skeptical because, hey, supplements, it's better to get your nutrients from food, but also
there's some data out there suggesting that when you supplement with calcium, you cause a transient
rise in your blood calcium level, and although your body is very good at controlling that through
homeostasis to bring it back down to normal, the transient spikes might be bad for you by promoting,
for example, heart disease.
Now, personally I'm not ready to jump on that bandwagon yet in necessarily claiming that the calcium
supplements that are out there are doing harmful things to most people.
But I have a new recommendation that I think solves that issue and solves some other issues as well.
So, this recommendation is to use bone meal powder mixed into your food.
I initially thought of this because I wanted to benefit my teeth.
I was eating a dairy-free diet for reasons that I'll talk about in some other episode.
I was eating a dairy-free diet.
I knew my diet without dairy was not providing enough calcium, and so I wanted to get a calcium
supplement.
But I thought, wait a second, what if it's better for my teeth to chew the calcium along with my
food?
Because if you consume dairy products, even if it's milk, it's still swishing around in your mouth,
you swallow it, you swish a little bit more around your mouth, it's gradually coming in, coating
everything in the mouth and going down.
Now, yes, calcium is good for your teeth after it gets into your stomach because it goes into your
blood supply, the blood supply goes into the teeth and nourishes the teeth from the inside, but that
doesn't mean that there's no benefit to consuming calcium around your teeth.
For example, when you're eating food, that's when bacterial acid production is higher.
That's when demineralization is going to run higher, and if you have the nutrients swishing around
in your saliva to balance that with remineralization, I think that's a good thing.
And so what I started doing was taking bone meal powder, taking 1/4 teaspoon at a time, sometimes
1/2 teaspoon with my evening meal, providing between 250 milligrams in 1/4 teaspoon or 500
milligrams of calcium in 1/2 teaspoon for the particular bone meal that I was using.
And I started mixing it together in my mixed starches.
Now, this isn't going to be very easy if you—if the foods you eat don't mix, but to the extent you
eat foods that can either be blended with something or be stirred with something, just stir it into
the food so that it mixes homogeneously in the food.
Bone meal powder is a food.
If you look, for example, at where did the Inuit get their calcium from, it was by freeze-drying
fish bones and pulverizing them into a powder.
So bone meal powder is a traditional food, and to mix it together with your food is the closest
approximation to what you would get if you were actually eating calcium rather than supplementing
with calcium.
Now the question is what bone meal powder?
Well, there is a concern that if you don't know where the cows are coming from, and they might be
coming from industrial, polluted areas, there's a concern that things like lead could wind up in the
bones, for example.
So I talked this over with Chris Kresser, and we came to the conclusion that the best bone meal to
use right now would be Traditional Foods Market Whole Bone Calcium, which is shown on the screen,
and it's from free-range, pasture-raised animals.
If you'd like to purchase this product without using my affiliate link, just Google the product
name.
If, on the other hand, you'd like to purchase this product with my affiliate link so that you can
support the free content that I produce at no extra cost to you, then use
chrismasterjohnphd.com/calcium to purchase the product.
The audio of this episode was enhanced and post-processed by Bob Davodian of Taurean Mixing.
You can find more of his work at taureanonlinemixing.com.
This episode is brought to you by Testing Nutritional Status: The Ultimate Cheat Sheet.
Everything you could ever need to know to optimize your nutrition all in one place.
Easier to find and use than ever before.
Get your copy at chrismasterjohnphd.com/cheatsheet.
Use the code LITE5.
That's all capitals, L-I-T-E, the number 5.
LITE5 to get $5 off.
All right, I hope you found this useful.
Signing off, this is Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com.
This has been Chris Masterjohn Lite.
And I will see you in the next episode.
