I'm old and I've been running this health channel for a long time, 10 years now.
And someone asked me about 2 weeks ago, "Hey, you've been doing this for a long time.
Like, what are your top 10 tips?" And I'm like, "Oh my gosh, no one's actually asked me that."
People ask me all kinds of random things, but what are my top 10 tips?
Number one is not that esoteric.
I'm going to start with one that I think is probably the most important.
And that is prioritizing daily movement over any kind of volume-based workouts.
That is a simple one and you're probably going to want to click off the video.
Please stick around.
I'm going to get in the weeds a little bit and it's kind of cool with some of the stuff I've learned
over the last 10 years to ultimately come up to my top 10, in reality 12, tips.
When it comes to prioritizing movement throughout the day, the evidence is so strong.
For fat loss, it's amazing.
For preserving muscle, it's really good.
All you need to do is have intense workouts be a short catalyst.
Don't rely on high volume all the time.
Movement throughout the day and intensity as a catalyst.
But let's just get that one out of the way.
And after this video, I put a link down below for probably one of the coolest things I've seen in
the biohacking world yet, let alone used, and it is a red light therapy blanket.
So, you can't make fun of me for red light therapy anymore because the science is way too strong and
it definitely works.
And the military uses it, professional athletes use it, sports teams use it.
Definitely works.
The problem is you really need like full body coverage.
So, you know, a lot of times people end up having to go to like really expensive tanning beds and
sort of things that are actually red light therapy beds.
Anyway, the point is is that Bon Charge has a red light therapy like blanket.
It's like a sleeping bag that you get in where they've managed to get the 660 nanometer wavelength
red light into a flexible sort of diode that you can actually crawl in this thing like a sleeping
bag and it's very reasonably priced when you consider how much it costs to typically go in a red
light therapy bed.
So, make sure you use that code that is down there by the link for Bon Charge, specifically in this
case, their red light therapy blanket, which is more like a sleeping bag.
This next one, number two, is interesting tip that definitely makes the cut.
And that is having watermelon or intra-workout carbs to improve your glucose tolerance, especially
if you're insulin resistant.
Now, hear me out on this, it sounds crazy.
I love fasting workouts and I train all the time with no fuel at all, all the time.
But, if you are insulin resistant, what happens is you don't get the glucose into the cell the way
you want to, right?
The way you really need it to.
But, when you're working out, you have insulin-independent glucose uptake, which means the glucose
can get into the cell without the presence of insulin.
So, this is your time as someone that is insulin resistant or metabolically not very flexible to
allow the carbohydrates to get into the cell without having to use insulin, which means you're going
to actually get it in there, which means that the cell is going to start to change its programming
to be able to utilize carbs again and you might actually develop some more glucose tolerance.
Now, the reason I use watermelon is simple.
Watermelon is straight-up extremely hydrating.
It's high in citrulline, so it increases blood flow, and it's just got like the perfect amount of
carbohydrates to help with what's called the SGLT1 transporter and help glucose and sodium come in
so that you can ultimately draw water in by osmosis.
So, hydrating and good for glucose tolerance.
Number three, periodic protein restriction and boluses.
So, think of it as protein fasting where you're taking protein down low and then having it come high
and ultimately at the end of the week or the end of the day, ending up where you want to be with
your protein goals.
But, what I've learned over the years is that we actually develop a sensitivity to protein just like
we develop insulin sensitivity if we abstain from carbs for a while, we can develop a certain level
of protein sensitivity.
It's why you are more protein sparing when you fast more cuz your body gets adapted to it, unless
you fast too much.
There's always a too much.
So, periodic protein restriction and boluses, and I've learned some of the most fascinating stuff
I've made lots of videos about that you can have a large chunk of protein at one point in time and
still utilize it a lot more than we used to think.
The fourth tip, which is one that you've probably heard before, but it's so important and it takes
the cake as one of the most important ones, and that is counting your calories over the course of 7
days versus over the course of 1 day.
Look at your calories over the course of your whole week because you're going to have days where you
eat 1,000 calories, days where you eat 3,000, days where you eat 2,000.
Do not keep it linear.
Keep your body on your toes a little bit.
It's less about being on your toes, more about constant adaptation, not just consistent feeding all
the time.
Number five, having salt when you're craving sugar.
That definitely makes the top tip.
That is a such a weird random one.
And there's evidence there, at least in the rodent model stuff, but there's so much anecdotal
evidence with myself and people that I talk to.
You're craving sweet things, a lot of times you're actually craving something salty because the salt
mechanism, the craving for salt, is going to override a lot of things.
And sometimes, there's a little bit of like a crossing with the gustatory response and the NST
neurons, and you actually end up wanting something sweet, but in reality, you need something salty.
So, you have something salty and your sweet cravings go away.
Now, is this vetted in lots of human data?
No, but it makes the cut because it has come up repeatedly in rodent model and anecdotal
experiences.
So much so to the point that I feel comfortable giving it as a very safe tip.
You would have something a little bit salty, and it makes it pretty darn easy.
Now, the next tip has to do with when you're fasting that kind of coincides with this.
Another way to curb appetite when you're fasting, when you're restricting calories, is green tea.
Hands down, the EGCG that's in green tea has a profound effect when it comes down to appetite.
It is very significant, so much so that I don't fast without consuming green tea.
So, yeah, the salt, the electrolytes, all that stuff, it works for curbing the appetite, but you're
not getting the benefit that you get as far as fat oxidation as well as antioxidant effect as well
as potential appetite suppression that you would get from green tea.
So, anytime you're restricting calories, I just did a video not that long ago.
There were 55 studies that came out in this large meta-analysis demonstrating that green tea is
quite literally the most potent thing you can drink for metabolic health.
If you're fasting, restricting calories, green tea, green tea, green tea.
Number seven, stay out of metabolic purgatory.
Stay out of the gray area.
When you go low carb, you need to c- commit to going low carb.
And if you add carbs in, you should probably just commit to adding more carbs in.
When you go really, really low carb or keto, your body kicks in backup mechanisms to produce glucose
and to restore muscle glycogen, and you have enough ketones on board to give you energy.
If you have just enough carbs where you're not in ketosis, but you're not quite fueling on carbs, we
call it the gray area or metabolic purgatory.
You haven't gone low enough to get adaptation from low carb, and you're not high enough to maximize
the use of carbs.
So, you're sitting in that gray area, which is usually in the ballpark of like 50 to 100 g of carbs.
It's almost better just to commit to a few more carbs or go all the way.
Number eight is creatine for sleep deprivation.
Creatine is great for building muscle, but the literature is so strong on the neuroprotective
effects and the ability to light the brain up more when you're sleep deprived.
So, 10 g of creatine first thing in the morning if you did not sleep well the night before.
It is unbelievable what a difference you will see.
I mean, truly amazing.
And when I saw that the first time, I'm like, "Nah, this is just hocus pocus weird stuff." And I
tried 5 g, and it did a little something, but the sweet spot is 10 g of creatine.
Dr.
Darren Candow taught me that, the world's leading creatine researcher.
Epic stuff.
Number nine is fasting for 18 to 20 hours instead of 16.
The magic starts at 16 hours.
At 16 hours, you start getting the benefits of fasting, truly.
So, go 17, 18, 19, 20 hours, and do it a little less frequently.
Trust me.
More bang for the buck without just constant calorie restriction.
16:8 is like consistent caloric restriction, whereas 18 to 20 is more shot in the arm aggressive
bolus of fasting that you're looking for.
Number 10 is front-load the day.
Front-load the day with your calories and taper as the day goes on.
So, start with higher fat, higher protein, lower carb.
Breakfast looks like that.
Lunch, go to moderate protein, maybe high protein, moderate fat, still low carb.
Dinner, low fat, high protein, high carb.
This works along with circadian cues better.
It helps with serotonergic function, so you sleep better, and it makes it so you keep insulin low
during the day and potentially burn more fat, and you spike a little higher at night and instigate
some recovery.
Number 11, there's nothing wrong with a crutch.
And what I mean by that is occasionally using something that helps you get through your fitness.
If you have to use a supplement, if you're someone that needs to use TRT, if you're someone that
needs to use peptides, it's not the end of the world.
Number 12, glutamine when you are stressed.
Glutamine will help the gut.
It feeds the gut cells.
Literally feeds the gut cells.
By using glutamine when you are stressed or when your training volume is high, it does literally
protect your gut.
It's something that has changed the game for my immune system, so that my gut doesn't wear down and
I just get sick all the time.
Lastly, number 13, replace alcohol with kava.
It may not be perfect, but it's a lot better than alcohol, and kava is something that gives you that
GABAergic effect, makes you calm and relaxed without the impairment.
Don't get hooked on it.
It can be bad, too, but it's a heck of a lot better than alcohol from a metabolic perspective.
And I'll see you tomorrow.
