There are a lot of things that we do better than our grandparents did them, but eating liver is one
area where our generation really dropped the ball.
Liver is the most nutritious food on the planet.
And if you don't understand why it's important, or you do understand why it's important, but you
find it difficult to work into your diet, then this video is for you.
Hi.
I'm Dr.
Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com and you're watching Chris Masterjohn Lite, where the name
of the game is details shmeetails.
Just tell me what works.
And today we're going to be talking about why liver is important, and five ways that you can work it
into your diet.
You can just pick which one would work best for you.
So liver is so powerful that if you eat it once a week, you will meet your needs for vitamin A, for
vitamin B12, and for copper for that entire week .
It's an excellent source of a lot of minerals, of most B vitamins, and when it comes to choline and
biotin it's through the roof.
Only liver and egg yolks are super abundant in choline and biotin.
Everything else falls by the wayside.
Why are these nutrients important?
Well they're important to your circadian rhythm, to your vision, to your metabolic health, your
liver, your skin, hair, nails, your mental health and your mood.
So many things that these are important to, so many bases that are covered just by eating liver once
a week.
And what do we mean by that?
Well, I mean eating 4 to 6 ounces of freshly cooked liver or the equivalent through a number of
other ways that I'll talk about today.
So the number one way that you can eat liver is to cook it yourself.
Number two is you can use something like liverwurst or braunschweiger that contains liver blended in
with other meats.
I personally use U.S.
Wellness liverwurst; it's 20% liver, but it also has kidney and heart blended into it.
And kidney and heart have their own spectrum of nutrients and so that allows me to get this blend of
other nutrients.
Now if we are using U.S.
Wellness, the liverwurst is 20% liver, so you'd have to eat five times more of it, and the
braunschweiger is 35% liver, so you'd have to eat about three times more of it.
That works out to about a pound of braunschweiger per week or pound and a half of the liverwurst.
Number three: is Epic Liver Bites.
These are convenient because all you have to do is open the package and eat them.
It's blended with beef so the taste is milder.
It's a little dry because they're dried, so you might want to have a glass of water on hand while
you're eating them.
Unfortunately, I emailed Epic to find out what is the percentage liver and they told me that was
proprietary.
I think that's super lame and unhelpful, but trying to reverse engineer it based on the nutrients it
contains, I think you need to eat about two or two and a half times the amount of Epic liver bites
to get the same amount of liver.
That works out to eating one package of the liver bites every one to two days.
Number four: is to use a liver mousse or pate.
This is liver that's been blended with fat, and that does dilute the liver somewhat, but it makes it
much more palatable.
To be honest, I think you can substitute it for cheesecake, and as long as you have some whipped
cream and some sweetener, it's like a desert.
One of the problems with liver mousse or pate is that they often have so much other stuff in them
besides the liver, that the liver gets very dilute.
However, there's a specific company: Three Pigs, based out of New York and they make a duck liver
mousse that has enough liver in it that if you eat one package, whether it's the 5 1/2 ounce
package, or the 8 ounce package; you're going to get the equivalent of 4 to 6 ounces of liver per
week.
The fifth and final way: is to use desiccated liver tablets or capsules.
Now the amount of liver in these can vary a lot according to the size of tablet or capsule, but if
you're using a product that puts it into a standard size capsule that you're used to, you're
probably gonna have to take 10 to 15 capsules per day.
An easy way to figure it out is to try to reverse engineer it by protein.
Usually the protein will be listed on the packaging, and so what you want to try to do is to get 25
to 30 grams of liver protein per week.
Now these are what I consider the five most accessible ways to do this.
If you look on the Internet, there's lots of other creative ideas that people have used to try to
work with liver into their diet.
If you really love one that I didn't mention, let me know in the comments.
Alright, I hope you found this useful.
Signing off, this is Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com, and you have been watching Chris
Masterjohn Lite.
