Alan Balliett says "Hi, Chris.
You're looking good." Thank you.
"I'm 73 and I'm in remission with diabetes, low carb controlling glucose.
I wanted to ask you what are the nutrients that I should be taking to improve my memory, both long-
term and short-term.
Recall for me is almost non-existent unfortunately." Well there are a tiny handful of things that I
could say as a general umbrella are good to take from memory.
I would say alpha-GPC or alpha-glycerylphosphorylcholine at a dose of 1200 milligrams per day.
Front-loaded towards the first half of the day.
So take that with breakfast and lunch, but not in the evening, that can help boost your
acetylcholine levels and is a very good way to boost your memory.
It's been shown to be pretty convincingly effective in Alzheimer's disease.
It seems to be just generally a good way of boosting acetylcholine levels.
It is a source of choline itself.
Then any kind herbs that have acetylcholinesterase inhibitors in them might also be good.
So ginkgo biloba would be a good herb to try, it has acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, and then it's
also good at promoting circulation.
So part of its effect on cognitive function seems to be through boosting circulation to the brain.
Then I think lion's mane has a lot of promise as in terms of neurological benefit.
There's numerous ways to get lion's mane, but Four Sigmatic makes Think.
As a Masterpass member, you have a discount on Four Sigmatic.
They have a Lion's Mane coffee version of Think, and then they also have a caffeine-free coffee-free
Think packet.
Actually I have some right here.
I haven't really drank any of it, but you just put the packet and mix it with water.
Actually I have some coffee here too, but I prefer to regulate my dose of caffeine and lion's mane
separately.
So anyway, but that said, you really should look at testing nutritional status, the ultimate cheat
sheet and go through what other signs and symptoms you have that could be related to nutrients.
Do all the lab testing that makes sense to do, whether it's the comprehensive screening, if you can
afford it.
Or otherwise going through any of the nutrients that make the most sense based on your signs and
symptoms.
Then of course you should do a dietary analysis with Cronometer or there might be the other apps
that are just as good now, but Cronometer's the one that I generally use.
Where you can spend whatever time it takes to do a representative analysis of your diet.
If you eat the same thing every day, you could just do it for a couple of days.
But if you have a pretty varied diet, you might want to do it for a couple of weeks.
Then just look at your average vitamin and mineral intake and see if you're running short on
anything.
Because running short on practically anything could affect your cognitive function.
So we were just talking about iron, well, too much iron can hurt your cognitive function and not
enough iron can hurt your cognitive function.
So iron is definitely a great thing to be proactive about testing just in case in general.
Because so many of the symptoms between too much and too little overlap, but something like that
might be more common.
But if you're profoundly deficient in anything, you're going to have some negative effect on your
memory, because it's either a direct effect of that nutrient in the brain, because what nutrients
does memory require?
All of them.
Or it could be very indirect.
So if you have one nutrient deficiency that's impacting your sex hormones and your adrenal hormones
and your hormones are flattened out, that's probably going to cause memory problems as well, just
due more generally tobrain fog.
So I think that alpha-GPC, ginkgo and lion's mane are top things to try as an umbrella statement.
I think you should definitely get your iron status tested, but you really need to go through a
dietary analysis sign and symptom analysis, and lab work along the lines of the approach outlined in
Testing Nutritional Status: The Ultimate Cheat Sheet to identify any nutritional gaps.
Because you're only as good as the weakest link in your chain and you want to find out what those
weak links are.
All right.
I hope that helped.
Thank you for your question.
