If you go to the gym and you exercise, you'll burn fat.
If you go for a walk, you will burn fat.
And this isn't a question of fat oxidation, like what percentage of fat you burn.
No, this is getting down to brass tacks, like weight loss, general fat loss.
What burns more?
Someone that exercises or someone that increases activity.
Being real here, I think most of us know deep down that just being active is probably better when it
comes down to like longevity and things like that.
It's not really rocket science when you think about it.
Like if you look at like the European region, like you look at cultures there, they don't exercise a
whole lot, but they walk around a lot, they're active, and they definitely have better life
expectancy.
So, from a longevity perspective, I don't know if it's really up for debate that much.
But from a fat loss perspective, I mean, look at bodybuilders, for example.
They have very clear, defined, concentrated periods of exercise, and they're jacked.
Look at elite-level athletes, very clear, defined, concentrated exercise and concentrated rest and
recovery.
So, it creates this sort of social-cultural norm that that is what it takes to be very fit or to be
very lean or to just have better even life expectancy.
It's just kind of thought that way.
There is now a study that really looked at this well, and I'm excited to share it.
We're going to break it down.
I also put a link down below for a company that makes a C15.
For people that don't eat a lot of cheese or people that want to get those C15 levels up.
A lot of their research was funded by the United States Navy.
They have some really interesting stuff.
It's a company called Fatty15.
I've talked to Dr.
Venn Watson multiple times, and I've even interviewed her on this channel.
She is who really is one of the people that kind of sort of discovering this deficiency in dolphins.
But this is something that's been talked about across the literature for a long time, but only
recently has become sort of household information.
I put a link down below for you to try Fatty15.
If it's something that's of interest to you, I think it's a very important compound.
It is a form of saturated fat.
So, it's not like you were talking anything really weird here.
It's a saturated fat that we would get from good quality cheeses, but the amount of cheese you'd
have to eat to get our levels back up.
And again, this is a real deficiency, would be a lot of cheese.
So, that link is down below.
It's a 15% off discount link, top line of the description underneath this video.
I highly encourage you to at least go there and read some of the literature.
It's fascinating.
So, this study published in PLOS One, it matched calories on low intensity compared to high
intensity exercise.
This is what's cool.
They matched the calories.
So, basically they had people do low intensity exercise for x amount of calories or high intensity
exercise for x amount of calories.
But, it wasn't really even exercise.
They just measured activity for 1,000 calories or for x amount of calories.
So, for 4 days they had subjects that were normally sedentary.
They had them substitute 1 hour of their sitting time for high intensity exercise.
So, let's just hypothetically say they were sitting for 8 hours a day.
Said, "Hey, for 1 hour we're going to substitute your sitting for high intensity exercise.
Cool?
Okay." The other group, they said, "Okay, you're sitting down for a long period of time.
We're going to cut your sitting time in half.
You're not going to exercise, but you're going to walk for part of the time, and then you're going
to stand for another part of the time.
The rest of the time you can sit.
So, half the time you're normally sitting, we want you to just be either standing or walking.
Okay." This is what's wild.
Wasn't a brisk walk, it's just regular activity around the house, things like that.
Check this shiznit out.
Remember, they had the exact same daily energy expenditure.
There was no difference in the amount of calories burned.
The only thing that changed was one group did 1 hour of intense exercise, another group didn't even
exercise, they just moved around.
There was virtually no change in insulin sensitivity in 4 days with the group that did the exercise.
They didn't improve their insulin sensitivity one bit.
But, the group that got up and moved around, didn't exercise but got up and around.
They improved their insulin sensitivity.
They also decreased their triglycerides, which generally means they're burning fat.
And they increased their HDL.
So, what's wild is from a direct fat loss perspective in 4 days, you can't say yay, they burned more
fat or more fat fat oxidation, but their metabolic parameters improved to demonstrate as such.
If your insulin sensitivity goes up, you're going to start to have the signal that allows yourself
to burn more fat.
Remember, one of the reasons that people store fat when they're insulin resistant is because they
are impeding that insulin signal and extra glucose circulates and then can go through what's called
de novo lipogenesis, but you also have an increase in inflammation that can steamroll this as well.
There is no one out there denying that insulin resistance and obesity go hand in hand.
Some of the debate is out there surrounding like which came first, the chicken or the egg, but it
really seems to be a little bit of both, realistically.
Either one can go either direction.
Here's what's wild.
You've seen decrease in triglycerides.
That means that you are probably having less of the storage form of fat and more circulating fatty
acids, which makes to be burned, which makes sense.
Exercise is a small finite amount of time and then you're right back to being sedentary.
Let me read you what the authors of this paper said.
Quote, "The present study performed under free-living conditions suggests that 1 hour of physical
exercise cannot compensate for the negative effects of inactivity if the rest of the day is spent
sitting." Point is is from a metabolic health perspective, from an all-cause mortality perspective,
and highly likely from a fat loss perspective, it is much more advantageous for you to get up and
move around than it is to even exercise.
With this being said, let me talk about another study that was really important.
The Journal of Environmental Resources and Public Health had published a paper that found that both
active people and athletes and inactive people all saw benefits from a VO2 max perspective and
metabolic health perspective from occasional high intensity interval training.
Let me say that again.
Active and inactive people saw benefits in VO2 max and metabolic health parameters.
So, what that means is that the occasional surge above your baseline is important for health and for
fat loss.
The reason that I can confidently say that is because active people and inactive people.
So, if you took an inactive person, their definition of high intensity is going to be wildly
different than that of an active person.
So, if Usain Bolt came over to your house, and he said let's do an intense workout, you wouldn't
even probably be able to hang with him.
If you went to Usain Bolt's house, and you said let's do an intense workout, he'd be like, "When is
the warm-up done?
Are we done with stretching?" Right?
The whole thing is different.
If I went to Usain Bolt's house, he'd be like, "Dude, you ready to go?" The point here is is that
high intensity activity is going to be different.
So, relative to active or inactive people, any surge in intensity above baseline was good max and
metabolic parameters.
So, that doesn't mean you need to go to the gym every day and do a high intensity interval training
session.
What it means is you need to increase your baseline because we know that's the best thing for fat
loss and metabolic health.
Non-exercise activity thermogenesis is going to burn more fat, period, hands down, end of story,
than exercise.
But, your exercise is going to be what stimulates the changes to occur in the first place.
So, it's like, "Hey, let me start the nail in the wood board.
Let me get it tapped.
Tap the screw, right?" Boom.
Then, your lifestyle threads it the rest of the way in.
Okay?
So, without the exercise, you might just be threading to nowhere.
So, the exercise can stimulate that start, but I want you to remember that it's all about creating
little taps, little nails in different places of the house that you are building, and then the
lifestyle does the rest of the work.
Think of it as the architect needs to actually build the framework.
You need to have the building plans first, okay?
Then the crew can come in and do the work, and that's your lifestyle.
Now, there was another study that was published in Scientific Reports, okay?
Took a look at three randomized control trials.
I talked about this in other videos, and essentially they did a similar thing.
They took subjects that were sitting down for a long majority of the day.
They had one group add one hour of exercise, and they had another group sub five hours of sitting
for a light walking.
Very, very similar all the way down to even being four days.
But the interesting thing with this study is again, they saw no change with the exercise group in
terms of insulin, in terms of plasma lipids, but they did with the walking group.
But what's interesting about this one is the exercise group did see a change in their endothelium.
So, their vascular structure changed, which means that they were actually getting more resilient and
stronger, but the dosing was appropriate.
So, in this case it was an hour, but you could probably get by with much less.
So, at the end of the day, I think a good safe bet would be don't sit as much, walk as much as you
can, try to move as much as you can, try to eat a little bit more in the good of way of quality food
that's going to encourage you to move more.
Yes, I said eat more, move more, more than move more, eat less.
Stoke that fire.
Just make sure you move that energy through the system.
And then occasionally exercise a few times per week at a high intensity as a basic basic reminder.
Now, if you're an athlete, disregard that.
You can train hard.
Just try to also be active as well.
As always, I'll see you tomorrow.
