Forrest says, “What are the top interventions for panic and anxiety?
Nutritional is my main question, but everything else is of interest.” Panic and anxiety, methylation
factors driving the relative rigidity versus flexibility of the mind, I would expect rigidity to
favor panic and also generalized anxiety when there are other factors that favor the things that are
being rigidly focused on as panic or anxiety producing thought patterns, thoughts or emotional
patterns.
And then histamine, I think is very often overactive in the brain, which at healthy levels
contributes to alertness, but at overactive levels will contribute to generalized anxiety and I
believe can also produce an episode of panic when acutely and extremely elevated.
Methylation is also important to minimizing histamine naturally.
So, methylation is overwhelmingly important.
I do think that other factors impacting dopamine can be relevant in the sense that the main way that
methylation regulates mental rigidity is through decreasing the pool of tonic dopamine, which favors
mental flexibility.
And so, you can also favor mental flexibility by increasing the activity of dopamine receptors that
mediate the basic response dopamine.
And I think vitamin A is an important factor in that.
I also think endocannabinoids derived from arachidonic acid in the classically understood ones
increasingly thought to be also derived from omega-3s can also regulate dopamine metabolism in a way
that is favorable for reduced stress response and increased mental flexibility.
Generally, I think certainly B12 is critical with mental health.
Generally, meat, bones, and skin like a balanced nose to tail animal product is probably gonna be
the best way to deliver the key nutrients that are often missing, which is consistent with
vegetarian and vegan diets being associated with those things, although interpretation of that diet
is controversial and I’m not saying that you can’t have a healthy vegetarian or vegan diet.
It’s possible for some people.
And then, you know, there's that aspect.
In terms of non-nutritional strategies, I think meditation and other mindfulness techniques can go a
long way towards being able to step outside of your own thoughts and become an observer of your
thoughts rather than a victim of your thoughts.
And I think seeing a therapist, reading, doing the work to understand your thought patterns, and to
implement and execute new thought patterns can be very helpful.
Pulling the GABA lever can obviously be helpful as evidenced by a lot of the non-SSRI drugs that are
used for anxiety.
GABA has been shown to help decrease brain waves associated with anxiety and decrease the stress
response in response to exposure to phobias.
So, supplemental GABA might be helpful.
And I guess maybe this is a little tangential, but someone with panic disorder is likely to exhibit
aversion behavior that can lead to agoraphobia.
And I think that facing your triggers in a way that does not over trigger you is extremely important
to preventing aversion behavior that leads to agoraphobia.
Like if you avoid triggers in life, but especially in panic disorder, you will get more and more
triggers and even more and more things you avoid and that is a recipe for complete degeneration of
mental health.
But at the same time, the optimal learning zone is always a bit outside your comfort zone, but not
too far out.
Otherwise, you can feel abandoned and that can provoke negative reactions.
So, you have to ideally work with a therapist.
But if not, just be very self-aware in terms of what is too much exposure and yet also be very
vigilant to not ever operate within your comfort zone except when you need a break from operating
outside your comfort zone on the weekend or something.
Okay.
Forrest, I hope that helped.
Thank you, Forrest, for your question.
