I think most people don't think of food as medicine.
I think most people think as food as something uh they need that they crave that they enjoy uh and
that eventually becomes problematic for them.
You know, I don't think people really understand the extent to which what they put in their mouth
can support them that it really can be healthpromoting.
>> Yeah.
>> Right.
I think it's because we are so calorie oriented like oh you know it's all a battle between what you
take in versus what you burn >> but you really view food as medicine.
>> Oh yeah because I think we are I mean the way I look at it we're homeostatic systems.
We're very and complex ones at that right we have all these organs all these biochemical pathways
and you know the one we also understand least is people's behavior that came up earlier and I'm sure
it will come up again.
Uh, and you have to tune all this stuff to keep it right.
And in general, most people do pretty well, but I think we could uh all improve that, I'm sure.
And that is the goal.
It's to keep this, you know, your car, right?
You want, if you want it to run forever, you want to keep all the systems working right and in
balance.
You don't let things get off too far.
And I think there's a tendency, and I think there's a problem with medicine today.
We wait till things are broken and then try and fix it.
And so obviously what you want to do is have people as well tuned cars for their entire life and
then you know pass away then that's how it should work.
Uh and so I think that's what we want to do.
Keep people tuned.
And so we probably don't get off to a good start early in life when we start people with all these
not so good diets like all the excessive processed food and sugar and losing our microbiome
diversity.
I think we really want to keep our car off and running right from the get-go.
It's, you know, it's a little bit late for some of us because we're probably a little bit hardwired.
Although I think we can tune that.
I try to do that as best I can.
I guess be doing a good job.
>> Yeah.
Well, anyway, we'll do it the best we can.
So, >> when I um travel, I will occasionally take a probiotic in addition to all the other things
I'm doing to support my gut microbiome.
I do take a supplement to support gut microbiome.
I also try and eat lots of fruits and vegetables.
>> I will say I'm very intrigued by the these fiber data, the different types of fiber data.
>> I'm intrigued because I noticed that some vegetable foods just don't agree with me, even if I'm
careful to chew them properly and do all that.
Um, and I find that over time I've just oriented towards eating the same, you know, six to eight
vegetables.
But, um, I'm tempted to do the following experiment.
Tell me if this is a good experiment, Snider.
Uh, if I'd be, uh, get a shot at a sabbatical in your lab.
Keep eating the same thing I'm eating.
Exercise the same.
Do do things that the way I'm I'm doing them now, but try a supplement like you said, Metamucil,
which is one particular type of fiber, right?
and do the before and after um LDL cholesterol, APOB, blood glucose regulation with a continuous
glucose monitor, then stop, do a wash out, swap that out for increasing like inulin fiber through
some other source.
So, so in other words, add add in a a pure fiber source, >> right, >> on top of an existing diet and
see how that impacts blood metrics and subjective well-being.
>> Yeah, I think that would be good.
I'd love to know your microbiome.
And these are the sorts of things we're trying to sort out.
Now, I don't have an answer, but I imagine the microbes you have in you, they have certain
hydrolaces that break down these fibers, and everybody's microbiome is very very different.
Uh, so we we have communities of microbes and and every person's community is different.
And so they we have these enzymes, hydrolaces, that do break down these fibers.
And my guess is that we already know that yours is going to be different from mine.
And so it may be if you eat a certain fiber, you're not as prepared to handle it as the next person.
So this is why we need to collect the right data.
And it may be at the end, well, you need to add the right probiotic, the right micro to go with that
fiber to better get the tuning you're looking for.
And in the long run, if you probably want permanent, you know, uh um incubation of this this
probiotic into your gut, you may actually have that a community because they're all interdependent.
They get personalized again early.
And so you basically formed your own personal guild.
And so one problem with probiotics is that they, you know, they don't stick that well.
Uh a lot of them wash out.
Although what a prolonged use can can help colonize some of that may be possible.
>> And they're cumbersome.
They're expensive.
They require refrigeration most of them.
>> Um >> Yeah, that's right.
>> I personally feel fortunate that I don't have what I would consider chronic gut is issues.
I just avoid certain foods.
>> Yeah.
But are you avoiding it because you're getting inflammation?
You said some don't agree with you.
Is that because of gas or is that because of >> Yeah.
>> inflammation?
>> It's more of an inflammatory response.
>> Yeah.
like it just kind of feel like you don't feel well and you feel kind of like overtaken by some
process which that's what I'm like you know this is poor men's uh I extract to uh you know um >> but
if you can figure out which fibers might be inducing that specifically maybe you can avoid those
foods with those fibers I don't know and again fiber seems to be very personalized so I think >> it
is something you can try it's a pretty easy experiment to do I think most people like the idea of um
fibers.
Again, we like to do individual fibers because ultimately I want to understand the effect of every
fiber and make combinations that would be personalized for people.
>> But uh you know, if you were to get apple fiber, oatmeal is yes, it's got a lot of metamucil and
the ramaine, but it has other things in there too.
And it's probably true that the combinotaurics are important.
Uh, and we'll get there at some point with the combinatorics.
I mean, I I guess I'm a, you know, I am a big data guy.
I like the idea with 8 billion people on the planet.
If we even got 1% of those uh doing food logging with sugar monitors and things like that, we'd have
a lot of the combinatorics all figured out.
>> Well, you've got a hundred people in your lab.
You're running clinical trials all the time, right?
Uh, your human subject uh requirements are big.
Uh I maybe we'll provide a link to uh where people can participate in some of these studies.
>> Yeah, we have studies running all the time.
>> Yeah, I because I know a number of people will be interested to do that and we're going to talk
more about sensors and uh air quality.
We've got a a bit more to cover in each domain, but I think it's really important uh and thank you
for breaking up this broad category that we've all heard about fiber into meaningful categories and
just even people's understanding that different people react differently to different fibers >> uh
is really important.
And a family member of mine was told that they needed to take Metamucil to get more fiber.
Had zero impact on their LDL.
Zero impact on um other important markers.
I might suggest to them that they consider taking a different uh fiber supplement in an effort to
control.
>> Maybe for them inulin will be the trick.
>> Great.
I I this is the first I'd heard of it.
Well, when I was listening to one of your talks.
Um >> it's a good thing you have 100 people in your lab.
By the way, folks, having a 100 person lab is um exceedingly rare and um >> we're a little smaller
now, but yeah, we're still very impressive.
Your your vigor is undeniable and um and >> I'm just lucky to have amazing people in my lab.
I consider myself very fortunate.
>> Well, I will say not just because you're sitting here.
I'm not just saying it to be kind.
Uh many people in your lab have reached out uh for reasons related to collaborations, etc.
And everyone in your lab speaks extremely highly of you and working with you.
Um, which is not always the case in large laboratories or small ones, but they they adore you.
[Music]
