That feeling of anxiousness that you have is just caused by like a malfunction with a
neurotransmitter.
What What's going on there, Dr.
Erbertstein?
It's too much glutamate and not enough GABA.
Glutamate's the excitatory neurotransmitter and GABA is the calming neurotransmitter.
And how that happens is from a simple dietary factor.
Too much sucrose.
Sucrossse is half fructose.
Fructose inhibits the conversion of glutamate to glutamine to GABA.
We want more GABA.
We want less glutamate in order to feel calm.
>> So literally like fructose which is in table sugar.
Yeah.
This is stopping the conversion of basically these neurotransmitters that you ultimately need for
your brain to feel calm.
>> That's right.
So is I mean anxiety >> it literally inhibits the enzyme glutamine synthes that take we it's a
complicated but we go from glutamate to glutamine and then from glutamine to GABA and it literally
inhibits that last step in that process the enzyme that makes that last conversion.
So when you're dealing with an anxiety issue I mean fructose could literally be part of the problem.
>> Absolutely.
That is wild.
So what what's happening when we feel anxious and like I mean know we could give the you know the
official like kind of title of anxiety but even just feelings of anxiousness right like future
tripping and like all this stuff like you think about it's just like oh this is just a a response to
my crazy life right but there's actually like chemical things going on in the brain there >> that's
right yeah I mean of course it does involve one's mind and one's psychology and how they think about
themselves all those things are important I'm not trying to downplay that you know I am I'm a
psychiatrist.
I think about mental health from that perspective as well.
And we can work on that perspective.
But in addition, it's your neurotransmitters.
It's your lack of GABA.
And that's from fructose.
That's so wild.
So GABA is I mean, describe to me what what GABA is like.
What how do we feel when we're in like what what's called a GABAurgic state?
>> Yeah.
What does that feel like?
>> Well, I mean, if you think about GABA, it's easy to think about it from a couple of perspectives.
Number one, um, when people drink alcohol, one of the main effects of alcohol is it increases GABA.
>> So, you know, people like the feeling of alcohol partly because of that.
It increases your GABA.
You feel calm, you feel comfortable, you want to socialize.
A lot of that is GABA.
There's also medications that doctors prescribe, including myself, that directly increase GABA,
these benzipines.
And people use them for anxiety.
They use them for sleep.
They use them for medical procedures.
They they're very useful medications.
They also have a lot of dangers.
You know, we can't if we're pharmacologically increasing GABA all the time, we can get into trouble.
>> But, uh, we we need GABA to feel calm.
You know, we need enough of it and we need a little less glutamate, which is exciting us.
And, you know, we need some glutamate, but too much of a good thing is is not good.
So when you're feeling anxious, is it fairly safe to say that that's like just an overabundance of
glutamate?
I mean, I know there's a lot of things.
So like you said, there's the mind, there's that, like if we just kind of zoom out a little bit.
I mean, is generally speaking, is that kind of what you see?
One of the things that's really important for the brain, too, is good quality fats.
And there's a kind of fat that is called C15.
It is a specific saturated fatty acid.
And it's not only really good for the brain, it's also really good for our metabolism in general.
So, there's a company that's called Fatty 15 who has pioneered, literally pioneered the research on
C-15 from a longevity perspective, from an insulin resistance perspective, really looking at all the
scientific literature.
This stuff is legit.
The science is there to back it up.
They have the clinical trials to back it up.
So, if you're looking for something that might help you out as far as just general metabolism is
concerned, you feel it almost instantly.
So, that link is down below.
Get a special discount using that link that is in the top line of the description for fatty 15.
too much glutamate and not enough GABA.
Yeah.
The combination.
>> So, but they but they feed off of each other, right?
You have to you like if if glutamate is is high or glutamate is low, like you're not going to have
both simultaneously high.
>> Most likely not.
That's right.
Yeah.
It's like a seessaw.
>> Okay.
That's right.
So, when when our glutamate is too high, usually our gather is too low.
And we're trying to get that right into balance essentially.
we need to get and in order to do that, you know, we're inhibiting that balance, um, we're we're
getting the seesaw too high for glutamate and too low for GABA through too much fructose.
That's so interesting.
I mean, and it's like look at, uh, anyone that's ever had monodium glutamate before, right?
Like the whole idea of MSG is for the umami effect, which is less about what it's doing on your
tongue and more about how it's it's lighting up your brain.
And like if you ever seen the uh fMRI scans of people like after they have like sugar or there are
ones with MSG which is really interesting.
It >> Yeah.
>> And this isn't even to to crap on MSG necessarily.
I mean it's a real thing and it's but it does light your brain up and sugar lights your brain up.
Right.
You're getting this excitatory effect in your brain that's making you say this is good.
I want to eat more of it.
That's right.
>> Um you think about that.
Maybe that's interesting in the short term but you think about okay that is a very similar feeling
to like anxiety as a whole.
like you're just like over excited but not necessarily in a good way.
>> That's right.
That's right.
That's not the kind of energy that really helps us function well.
Right.
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
We want energy of course, but we want energy and also that balance with perspective and calm and um
just a sense of well-being as well, right?
>> So then um okay, I mean what do we do about it?
Like what how do we obviously we can limit fructose.
That's going to be, you know, a big thing.
I think people kind of get hung up on fructose and think that when you talk smack on fructose,
you're saying that fruit is, you know, terrible.
And the reality is is that yes, some fruits have a high amount of fructose.
But a large majority of them don't have as much as people think.
And so we're not here just like shooting down fruit.
No, it's not about fruit.
I mean, really, this is not about fruit because >> yeah, fruit has, you know, the main sugar is
fructose, but fruit also has fiber in it.
It's going to slow down the absorption and it gives us a chance to metabolize that before we get
huge levels of fructose in the brain.
>> Yeah.
>> Um and so, um I don't want to, you know, talk bad about fruit because a lot of people benefit
from fruit.
Um and even people on a ketogenic diet, as we all know, can eat a little bit of some low fructose
fruits, some berries, etc., right?
And that's good for us.
But really, the main source of fructose in people's diet is sugar.
a a a sucrose molecule which is almost all sugars, table sugar, even the you know people think about
honey or maple syrup or agave.
This is all sucrose.
Half of a sucrose molecule is fructose and that has no fiber.
And many of the times people are eating those foods, it's just going straight into their
bloodstream.
It immediately gets converted to glucose and fructose and we have this huge serve a huge surge of
fructose and that's the problem.
That's what we're talking about.
Man, that is so interesting.
I mean, it's so okay, limiting the fructose, limiting the the sugar or being, you know, at least
aware of it.
You know, is there an additive thing that people can do, right?
I mean, it's you hear people talk about taking GABA supplements, but I feel like that's a uh I'm not
sure if that even really gets into the brain.
I know that's questionable, you know, whether that actually does.
I know some say that GABA will go into the brain if you have a a leaky blood brain barrier because
it's a big that's the only time that the molecule would actually be big enough to actually cross
through if you took it in supplement form, right?
I don't know if that's true or not, but either way, anyone that's ever taken just a straight up GABA
supplement knows that you don't you don't feel much like it's not like you're it's not like taking a
benzo where you're like really feeling something, you know, for your anxiety.
It's like you can't just take a GABA supplement.
So, what do you recommend people do there to kind of influence that GABAurgic state more?
>> Yeah.
Well, I mean, I think, you know, there's these natural methods.
You know, things like mindfulness practices, breathing practices, you know, some for some people
it's psychotherapy.
For other people, it's, you know, taking a hike in the woods or a walk in the woods.
Things that just generally calm down your system are going to increase GABA as well and lower
anxiety.
Um, you know, from a metabolic perspective, and that's one of the benefits of a ketogenic diet.
We know that ketogenic diets increase GABA and lower glutamate directly and this is from the
epilepsy literature.
So uh you know so we know that that's you know helps with epilepsy but it also helps with various
forms of other mental health like anxiety.
There's some really interesting data on bipolar disorder as well.
>> Is it having to do with the presence of the ketones themselves or is it more so just the absence
of the the sugar?
>> I don't think we know the the answer to that.
I you know I think that uh it's largely the absence of sugar.
Um but there may be some direct effects of ketones as well on improving GABAurgic tone.
And just to just to think about what GABA neurons do they're essentially like little breaks little
breaks on the other neur neurons that are transmitting information.
So there's they're all around the brain.
It's not like uh some of these other types of neurotransmitters we talk about like serotonin neurons
are in a very specific parts of the brain.
Dopamine neurons, same thing.
Very specific parts of the brain.
GABA and glutamate are all over the brain.
Those neurons are they're they're essentially what we call inter neurons.
They go in between neurons and they're either going to put on the gas, that's glutamate, or they're
going to put on the brakes, that's GABA.
And so they're sort of fundamental to the rest of the brain working well.
They're sort of the operating system underneath these other neurons.
>> Interesting.
I didn't realize that.
It's a I mean it's it's just like a a major major system.
It's not only it's just this one little small part of the brain.
>> No, exactly.
This this is like fundamental to all the rest of the brain working correctly.
That's right.
>> That's so interesting.
So I mean everything ranging from the hypothalamus down to you know executive function down to the
DMN like everything.
It's just like this is happening everywhere.
>> Exactly.
>> Yeah.
So, no wonder.
>> I mean, for lack of a better way of saying it, like where like anxiety can come in so many
different ways, you know?
It's not like there's just anxiety, then there's like this focusing.
It's like anyone that's ever battled with it knows that it like it takes on these like morphing
aspects that and that just makes sense cuz it's like it's all-encompassing in your brain.
It's not just like I have anxiety over XYZ.
>> Yeah.
I mean, some people do have those specific phobias, but you're right.
For most people, anxiety is this very general thing.
Um, it can affect them and many things can cause it, too.
It's not like one trigger, right?
They can be triggered by dozens of different things.
Uh, and there's also many ways to quell anxiety, like we talked about.
Um, sometimes in medicine, we use the analogy of of a fever.
Like a fever is not an illness.
It's just a sign that there is an illness going on somewhere.
Like for me, anxiety is like the fever of mental health.
It means something something's going on.
Yeah.
Right.
It's not usually like the thing.
Some for some people it is, but it means there's a mismatch.
There's something going on.
There's something going on with your mood or your thoughts or your metabolism.
You know, there's something going on that we need to pay attention to.
So, it's like a signal that like some, you know, and we have anxiety for a reason.
You know, anxiety is adaptive.
A little bit of anxiety gets us motivated.
It gets us thinking about what's meaningful to us.
Um, but too much of of it is not a good thing obviously.
>> But even your even your thoughts and things like that that might trigger anxiety like you have to
wonder like some degree like what comes first the chicken or the egg?
Like right the metabolic piece like okay if you're I mean I know from firsthand experience like
being I was type 2 diabetic like what 13 14 years ago and like I mean the thoughts that I had then
are wildly different than the thoughts that I have now.
Granted, I'm a different person and granted I'm more older and more mature and have kids and sure
there's all these things, but like metabolically, dude, I'm a it was a completely different beast in
terms of the kinds of thoughts, the ruminating thoughts, the things that would come through my head
when I was insulin resistant and the inability to detach from those thoughts like being able to, you
know, you do enough mindfulness practice.
Yes, you know that you understand that you are not your thoughts, right?
Like you there's this consciousness and then there's your thoughts and your thoughts are your not
your thoughts.
But it is I would almost go out on a limb and say it is like virtually impossible to disentangle
those when you are metabolically unhealthy.
Like you cannot it's they're just lock step.
>> So true.
Yeah.
I mean I think this is the missing piece in the way a lot of people think about mental health.
We're so used to thinking about it in the terms of neurotransmitters or your thoughts or your, you
know, your, you know, your therapy or your trauma and all those things are valid, but for many
people, they can work on all those fronts and still not feel well >> because the metabolic piece
isn't there.
The metabolic piece is so powerful.
It is so powerful.
And so for some people, it is the missing piece.
They get the metabolism online and then all those other things that they were working on all click
into place.
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
It's uh it's the antenna, right?
You know, it's you start getting into like a if I'm not careful, I'll always go this route cuz I'm
super interested in like quantum energetics and uh quantum biology too.
Like I find it fascinating, but it's like almost like you have to think of your metabolism in some
ways as like the antenna that can pick up the information that's out there, right?
the information that we're receiving from all different sensory inputs, whether they're sensory
inputs that we're very aware of with our five senses or sensory input of perhaps energy that we
don't know about, quantum energy, things that we're probably picking up senses for, right?
And if your metabolic health is in essence your antenna, like that is your ability to receive those
signals and do something with it.
And if your antenna is not able to actually pick up on those signals accurately, you're going to
have distortion in that.
you're going to feel like you're in an altered state of reality where you're, for example, anxious
all the time because you think something's going to happen that probably isn't going to happen, >>
right?
That's that's a very cool way to think about it.
Thank you.
Yeah.
>> What from a metabolic perspective, what are we starting to see in the mental health literature
with a ketogenic diet and specifically, let's talk anxiety, depression, and even bipolar.
>> Yeah, we're seeing incredibly powerful results.
Um so um let's just think about bipolar because that you know that's one that um you know we we have
almost the most data I would say on ketogenic diets.
Um so we we know that um you know people who put themselves or they get put on a ketogenic diet who
have bipolar have remarkable improvements.
Um there's one study actually that showed that just by reversing insulin resistance alone people
with treatment resistant bipolar depression if they could convert from being insulin resistant to
insulin sensitive and in this study it was randomized double blind placeboc controlled and in that
study they didn't even use a ketogenic diet they just use metformin which as we know can reverse
insulin resistance but it's not nearly as powerful as a ketogenic diet.
In that particular study, metformin converted half the people who took it from being insulin
resistant to insulin sensitive and they had marketked improvements on their depression.
And these were treatment resistant bipolar depression, meaning they had tried multiple different,
you know, cutting edge psychiatric medications and they were still depressed and they just reversed
their insulin resistance with metformin, you know, pretty weak and they got better.
Amazing.
>> Dang.
>> Yeah.
Then we have studies that show that with ketogenic diets showing who people who are adherent to the
ketogenic diet complete remission of their symptoms of bipolar disorder.
There's another study that was actually looking at glutamate.
So we've talked a little bit about glutamate already.
You know, too much glutamate.
Well, too much glutamate is a hallmark of bipolar disorder.
And we also know that the anticonvulsant medications, the anti-seizure medications that are given to
people with bipolar work by lowering glutamate.
But in this study, they were doing MRS, so magnetic resonance spectroscopy.
And they can measure glutamate in various areas of the brain.
And they saw a significant reduction in glutamate, way more than we get with those medications from
a ketogenic diet.
>> Incredible.
And those people felt tremendously better.
Um that same study, that's uh Ian Campbell's group at the University of Edinburghough.
Um they also showed a dose response effect of various symptoms to levels of ketones.
So that was really cool too.
>> The higher the ketones, the better response in things like mood, anxiety, um energy, and
impulsivity.
That was actually the highest.
They had the greatest reduction in impulsivity from elevated ketones of anything they measured.
I'm say impulsivity like just uh give me an example there.
>> So impulsivity is doing something without really thinking about it.
Like before you even think about it all of a sudden >> being reactive or >> Yeah.
You're being reactive.
You can impulsively yell at someone or you can impulsively you know eat something you would didn't
want to eat.
You just made a decision.
You started doing it before you could even think it through.
Essentially that's what impulsivity is naturally.
>> Yeah.
Exactly.
So we could reduce that impulsivity um >> greatly with higher levels of ketones.
It's almost like you're you're you're giving yourself like a couple nanocond time delay.
>> Yeah.
Like you >> to make the right decision.
The decision that you want to make, but you just couldn't make because you were just your brain, you
know, your behavior got ahead of where your brain was.
>> And we've all we've all been there.
Like I mean it's whether you're dealing with bipolar depression or not.
Like we've all we've all been in those situations and like you you come out of it and say situations
where you're you're mentally on your game and you're just like I I will never be impulsive again.
Like right?
But then it's like the the certain scenarios come where you maybe you're really hungry or whatever
and you just yeah you I think we've all we've all been there.
So I think all of us could agree that like being able to have that degree of um being able to make a
decision having a couple extra seconds to make a decision before you snap at your spouse or before
you kick the dog or something.
>> Absolutely.
Yeah.
We can all benefit from it.
>> What do you think uh neuroinflammation plays in that?
like is there a role?
You know, I know from my experience with the ketogenic diet, like you know, you see inflammatory
markers across the board generally go down and big decreases in NLRP3 and and nuclear factors,
master regulators of inflammation.
>> Yeah.
>> Do you think that plays a role with some of these conditions?
>> Yeah, 100%.
>> We know that every psychiatric condition has increased neuroinflammation.
It's been studied in depression the most.
um they're directly measuring inflammation in the brain and see it higher in depressed people.
They've actually done studies where people who are depressed who have elevated markers of
inflammation like HSCP highly sensitive C reactive protein.
They give them anti-inflammatories.
So there's a drug uh piloxib which is a strong anti-inflammatory but it's sort of safe for the uh GI
tract.
So, similar mechanism of action of something like, you know, Motrin, but think about taking a huge
amount without it affecting your your gut negatively.
Um, those people had a reduction in depression >> just from an anti-inflammatory.
>> Really?
>> Yeah.
>> Incredible.
>> I didn't even realize that.
Yeah.
I mean, >> I guess you I mean, so it's so hard sometimes like I've got some like chronic back issues
and like every once in a while like I'll take a Moxyam, right?
Yeah.
And it's like I have noticed that I usually am in a better mood when I take the lockx associated
with me with just maybe I'm in less pain, you know, right?
But it's so >> well pain is in the brain.
>> Yeah, it's not that's exactly what I'm kind of kind of alluding to.
It's kind of interesting is you're feeling >> Well, that's that is interesting.
I mean, actually, let's double click on that for just a second.
Like the pain being pain being in the brain.
So even with like chronic pain and things like that, like you tend to see I remember seeing some
literature that like people that are dealing with like mental health issues tend to have higher like
subjective pain scores a lot of times too.
>> Absolutely.
>> And you improve the mental health piece and pain improves.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah.
And I don't want to discount the fact that people have real injuries and they have real mechanical
issues going on in their bodies.
>> You know, that's for real.
I'm not trying to say it's all in your head.
>> Yeah.
No, I know exactly what you're saying.
>> Yeah.
But a huge component of where we experience pain is in the brain.
And so we see that with with various studies like you said, people with more mental health issues
have greater experience of pain.
We also see it that some of the pain doctors are mostly prescribing anti-depressants for pain.
Someone someone's not even depressed, but some of these anti-depressants actually work directly to
reduce pain.
>> That's so wild.
But my my view is that if we can reduce inflammation, improve mood with diet, we may not need the
anti-depressant, right?
I mean, because in in essence, pain is like your your your brain is always like telling a a story,
right?
And like so you have these responses to certain things that are hardwired that you may not even be
aware of that like when I do XYZ movement or when I do XYZ, I am in pain.
That's right.
And then you're creating this again predictive value of like you're expecting it without even
consciously being aware of it.
It's all happening in the background like when I move like this I'm in pain but it really is like a
predictive error again.
It's just sort of like your body's expecting it.
So it's anticipating it.
So it's creating this pain to protect you or protect you >> and we want to rewire that that system,
right?
So we want to change that prediction, right?
And in order to rewire the brain again, what do we need?
We're back to BDNF, >> which we're going to increase through exercise and ketosis.
And synergistically between the two of them, we're going to increase it even more.
>> That's super cool.
So, you know, we talked about BDNF in another in another video, but I want to come back to it a
little bit here.
So, BDNF is I mean, that's essentially what's allowing you to form new neurons and form like new
growth within the brain essentially, right?
>> It's especially the neurons connecting with each other.
So neurons if people you want to think about them they're you know they have a cell body the nucleus
is in there and then they have this long projection called an axon.
Some of those projections can be very long.
A single cell can go you know a number of inches or even there's some neurons that are a few feet
that go through our spinal cord.
One cell and at the end of it is these um projections.
We call those dendrites and they're projecting to other neurons.
They're talking to very many neurons.
each neuron may be communicating with hundreds if not thousands of other neurons.
And what BDNF does is it gets those neurons to connect more with the other ones.
Um, and that's essentially, you know, it looks almost like the roots of a tree or the branches of a
tree.
And so the term that neuroscientists use for that is called arborization.
Like from tree essentially we want we want those neurons to arborize more.
Um, and that's what BDNF does.
So you think about like with anxiety or something like that.
It's almost like you have these like default pathways you kind of go to.
Like I've always write a lot of um I've seen some like beautiful illustrations of it that show it
really well with like a you know a stream of water like forming a canyon, right?
And that's kind of like the path that you go and all of a sudden like you have some more
neuroplasticity and it's like you're creating different routes because you only know what you know,
right?
You only know the routes that you know and if your brain is just defaulting.
>> Yeah.
it'll go in those same loops and people can even notice that their bra their thoughts go in loops
like I can't stop thinking about the same thing >> we want our brains to become more flexible and
that's exactly what BDNF does it allows for that neuroplasticity and cognitive flexibility to be
able to think about that same situation differently and not have the same thought that causes
anxiety and over and over again >> do you think and maybe there's literature to back this up but I'm
just curious do you think that we have more flexible or less flexible brains compared to 50 years
ago >> oh boy.
I mean, is this or maybe even 100 years ago, right?
Like >> Yeah, that's a great question.
Yeah.
>> I mean, I think from a metabolic perspective, we're much less healthy than we were 50 or 100
years ago.
So, I think almost certainly, you know, we have less cognitive flexibility as well.
>> Um, >> you know, it's hard because I mean, there's other things that we're trying to do to
increase our cognitive flexibility.
Um, we're a lot of it has to do with stimulation as well.
True.
Um and so but I think you know each person can control their own amount of cognitive flexibility and
neuroplasticity.
I mean that's the most important message is that we all have the power to become more cognitively
flexible to have more neuroplasticity through all these things that we're talking about these
behaviors and your food choices your exercise choices um how much mindfulness and mind body
practices you do you know how much cortisol you're making we can control this >> if if some presence
of of ketones or ketogenic diet you know can improve this BDNF you know sort of a two-part question
like one is that a potentially lasting effect independent of staying on a ketogenic diet.
And a follow-up question to that is if yes, could periods of even prolonged fasting or bouts of
intermittent fasting where you're increasing ketones for short periods of time, but maybe not eating
in a ketogenic fashion during your eating periods, could you get some of these same benefits and
would they last?
>> Absolutely.
I mean, I think any amount of ketones can give us some benefits.
So, you know, I think for people with the more serious mental health conditions, I'm recommending
people stay in a ketosis, you know, stay in a ketogenic state.
Um, but that's not necessary for everyone.
You know, some people just a little bit of ketosis from an intense bout of exercise is going to
provide them benefits.
For some people, you know, cycling in and out of ketosis might provide them optimal health.
And I think evolutionarily, I think we were probably cycling in and out of ketosis.
So if someone's mentally healthy, metabolically healthy, they may not need to stay in ketosis all
the time.
Um this is seen in the medical literature too.
So um kids who have epilepsy, this has been studied, you know, epilepsy is the condition that's been
studied the most in terms of brain health and ketosis.
Um ketogenic diet is extremely helpful for epilepsy and it's been studied in many randomized control
trials.
There's two Cochran reviews.
Most importantly, with kids who have a good response to a ketogenic diet, they can come off all
their anti-seizure medication, retain good seizure control, they can be on a ketogenic diet for a
couple of years and then they can go off the diet and retain all the benefits.
>> Wow.
>> Amazing.
And that's been shown in also very good scientific studies.
Um, which means that they got benefits.
I mean, their brain through all that BDNF and mitochondrial benefits and all these things that we're
talking about, um, their brain healed.
They don't have epilepsy anymore, >> man.
So, is there It's not just the glutamate thing.
I mean, it's obviously not >> Yeah, there's there's so much Yeah, there's so many mechanisms to how
um improving our metabolic health improves our brain health.
you know the glutamate glutamine thing is and GABA thing is a huge thing for anxiety and for um but
yeah we've got all these other mechanisms you know this additional source of fuel bypassing brain
insulin resistance um but especially also improving mitochondrial health is huge.
Do you think that there's a uh a particular ratio of fats to protein that's really, you know,
because obviously if we're talking like extreme neurodeenerative stuff or we're talking epilepsy,
you're looking at a pretty high fat to protein ratio, but I think, you know, we've seen that that's
not as important for just like gen pop that's kind of doing ketogenic diet.
Correct.
What do you usually recommend, you know, in if you had a patient that was say, you know, dealing
with some generalized anxiety and that like do you just recommend like, hey, make maybe a standard
one one or something like that?
>> Yeah.
Well, I mean, I like to measure ketones um in people I'm using this for a mental health condition.
I think measuring ketones really helps.
So we we want to get them on a ratio that allows them to have you know beta hydroxy hydroxybutyrate
of you know around one or 1.5 for anxiety.
Um for a more serious mental health condition we might be shooting for two to three BHB levels.
Um and so it's what you know ratio allows them to get to that state and it really that can be very
individually dependent as you know and it largely depends on how much exercise they're doing too
right.
So, for someone who's exercising, um, you know, often we can do a 1.5:1 ratio and still get their
ketones above two.
So, we don't need to have these super high ratios that they used to do like a 3:1 or a 4:1, which is
it's pretty hard to sustain number one.
And I do worry about people not getting enough protein, too.
So, we can keep people in the sort of uh with a 1.5 to one um like 1.2 g per kilogram of protein per
day.
Um, so it's not, you know, maybe optimal if you're really trying to put on muscle, but it's enough
for muscle protein synthesis and enough to keep those ketone levels nice and high.
>> What about, uh, you know, with something like bouncing back to to bipolar for a minute, like what
is what do we know >> is what is happening in the brain there, right?
like it's such a I don't want to go too deep down that rabbit hole because it would almost deserve
its own topic, but I think it's it's largely kind of misunderstood and I think that you'd be a
person to kind of help understand it and maybe then we can maybe understand why the ketogenic diet
works so well particularly for bipolar because I think >> it's people are so quick to like point a
finger when someone has a mood swing or a mood shift with like bipolar but there's some real like
pathology there like what's happening.
>> Yeah.
I mean, I think we understand these mental health conditions mostly through symptoms more than we
understand them through brain mechanisms.
I wish I could tell you the pathophysiology of bipolar disorder or major depression or anxiety in a
solid scientific way, but the reality is my field is not there.
>> And we pretend we're there sometimes by, you know, saying this medication is going to change this
chemical imbalance in your brain and we know what the chemical imbalance is.
We don't.
Yeah, it's much more complicated than that.
But one of the universal findings in bipolar is actually elevated glutamate.
>> So that's what I was talking about before.
Um we almost always see elevated glutamate and bipolar, these medications that we often use for
bipolar lower glutamate.
And the ketogenic diet lowers glutamate even more.
>> Got it.
Okay.
In addition to all the other mechanisms that we're talking about about improving brain energetics,
you know, when the when neurons and aststerytes and gal cells have the right amount of energy, they
do their job.
>> Yeah.
>> Right.
They do the job the way they're supposed to.
When they're running out of energy, they can either get hyperexitable or hypoexitable.
Um, you know, they can just fail essentially in their primary function.
Do you think I mean let's say with bipolar with anxiety that you know if we come back to the very
first thing we talked about with like fructose kind of this rate limiting step that's essentially
inhibited.
Do you find or do we think that even people that don't necessarily battle with anxiety all the time
in a metabolically healthy person?
Would fructose still sort of impair that and cause them to feel more anxious than their baseline?
>> Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, I think it's so wild.
>> I mean, you you you even described that yourself that like, you know, if you >> or I, you know,
we consider ourselves pretty metabolically healthy, but if we go out and eat a bunch of sugar >>
Mhm.
>> we're not going to feel right.
>> Yeah.
Immediately.
And if you're sensit if you know what right feels like for yourself and you're sensitive to a
change, you can notice it immediately from one big bolus of fructose.
>> It's just it's so I find that so unbelievably interesting that it's I mean you can actually have
like an acute bout of anxiety just from inhibiting this you know this rate limiting step.
>> Yeah.
>> Like that's to me that is fascinating because that's you know in a world that we just can't
control a lot of things.
It's like this is one thing that we do have science and literature to back up that we we can
control.
I mean if you are going into a stressful situation where you are at risk of becoming anxious like we
know exactly what not to do.
>> Yeah, we do.
And I don't want to you know say that it's super easy because you know people are you know the these
food patterns are ingrained in us from a young age.
So I you know and I know you know about this as well.
It's like once you're in a pattern of using food to comfort yourself, um it's hard to break that.
>> Totally.
>> You know, and so I don't want to say that that's easy, but I do want to say that it's worth it
and it's powerful.
>> Totally.
>> Yeah.
Well, um Matt, where can everyone find you, man?
>> So, I I don't have a huge internet presence, but I am on LinkedIn, and so if people want to look
me up there, I love to respond to people there.
Um, and then my program where we do these immersive uh mental health treatments with metabolism is
called Accord.
And that people can find me at accordm.com.
Right.
Thanks, man.
Yeah.
