When we think about acne, we should be thinking about vitamin A, zinc, B5, and mitochondrial
function.
Before we think about drugs, that's before we think about retinoids.
That's before we think about tetracycling.
And here I'll show you why.
The following content is not medical advice and is for educational purposes only.
Vitamin A has to be converted to retinoic acid.
That's activated vitamin A.
And that requires zinc and it requires mitochondrial function.
And what the retinoic acid does is is it suppresses the overp production of keratin, a protein in
the skin that is associated with acne inside the acne lesions or the pimples.
It also suppresses inflammatory signaling directly in C acnes which is a bacterium that is
associated with acne.
When mitochondria convert food to ATP, as a byproduct of this, they convert NADH to NAD+ or NAD.
And you need NAD to activate vitamin A.
If your mitochondria are not good at converting food to energy in the form of ATP, as a byproduct of
that, they will not oxidize NADH to NAD.
But whenever you activate vitamin A or retinoic acid, you use up the NAD and make NADH.
And so you need to constantly oxidize that using mitochondrial function in order to keep vitamin A
activated.
So what is someone doing when they're applying something like Accutane isotininoan to their face?
They're supplying a synthetic version of retinoic acid because they don't have the mitochondrial
function to activate their own vitamin A or because they don't eat enough vitamin A or because
they're deficient in zinc.
And in fact, there's considerable hypothesis that zinc defici deficiency is a major factor in acne.
On the other side of this, another problem you have in acne is that fatty acids build up in the skin
and you get too much sebum which contains fatty acids.
That sebum then fuels the growth of C acnes which feeds primarily on fatty acids.
Well, how would you get rid of too many fatty acids in your skin?
You would use your mitochondria to convert the fatty acids to ATP and carbon dioxide.
You breathe the carbon dioxide out or in the skin it just evaporates and you don't have an
overabundance of fatty acids that are feeding C acnes growth.
You also need ATP to convert vitamin B5 to co-enzyme A or COA which is needed for that fatty acid
oxidation.
So if you don't have mitochondrial function, you're not going to have enough fatty acid oxidation in
the skin.
The fatty acids build up and they feed the growth of the bacteria that drives acne.
And what does medicine do with this?
Your dermatologist instead of fixing your mitochondrial function gives you tetracycline to kill the
C acnes.
The only reason the C acnes was there to a degree that's promoting acne is because your mitochondria
were not oxidizing the fatty acids.
Now if you take a problem that should have been solved with adequate nutrition and optimal
mitochondrial function then you throw in these synthetic drugs you wind up with problems.
So for example Accutane is although it is a form of retinoic acid it's 13 cy retinoic acid.
Most of the retinoic acid that you produce in your body is all transretinoic acid.
Only a small amount are forms like 9 cy and 13 cy retinoic acid.
So now you take this synthetic retinoid and you overwhelm the supply of retinoic acid to primarily
be 13 cy retinoic acid.
That's fine because it it helps in certain ways by performing some of the actions of activated
vitamin A, but it ultimately hurts you because now it interferes with other important actions of
vitamin A.
We've seen Accutane tied to depression, birth defects, vision impairment, and sexual dysfunction.
And in some of those cases, like the vision impairment and the depression, vitamin A actually helps.
So this shows that it's actually interfering with natural vitamin A function.
And then tetracycline is actually a mitochondrial toxin.
In fact, one of the side effects of highdose tetracycline is that it uh causes fatty liver disease.
And this is actually quite ironic because to the degree that it is poisoning the respiratory chain
and backing up the oxidation of fatty acids and therefore causing fatty liver in the context of
highdose introvenous tetracycling for example.
You put that on your skin and you're killing the C acnes, but now you're also hurting the
mitochondria in your skin, preventing the oxidation of their fatty acids.
And you might not have a high enough dose to cause fatty liver disease, but you might inhibit the
oxidation of fatty acids in the skin enough to keep feeding the C acnes and make you dependent on
the tetracyc.
So, acne starts with good nutrition and mitochondrial function as the cures we should be looking to.
And if we skip over those, we actually wind up poisoning the mitochondria even further.
