If you've ever been addicted to vegetable oils but now you know better enough to eat butter, then
this video is for you.
Hi.
I'm Dr.
Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com and you're watching Chris Masterjohn Lite, where the name
of the game is, "Details?
Shmeetails.
Just tell me what works!" Now, I don't know if you've been watching the Masterclass With Masterjohn
videos on the antioxidant defense system.
If you have, awesome.
If you haven't, who cares?
That is details details.
This is detailed shmeetails.
One of the key takeaways that you may or may not have seen from that series is that polyunsaturated
fats, which some of us like to call PUFAs, which are found in modern vegetable oils like soybean oil
and canola oil, and back in the day people even used to eat corn oil, and nowadays people also eat
safflower oil and sunflower oil.
If they're not called "high oleic" all these oils are rich in polyunsaturated fats.
And these increase our need for vitamin E and all the other antioxidants.
Now, although our bodies need some polyunsaturated fat there's a lot of good reasons to believe that
we should consume small amounts like were found in traditional animal fats, tropical oils, and oils
like olive oil, instead of the really large amounts that we find in modern vegetable oils.
But here's the thing.
It can take four years for the amount of polyunsaturated fat that's stored in your body to fully
accumulate when you're eating a diet rich in vegetable oils, and when you switch from something like
soybean oil to coconut oil, that polyunsaturated fat takes about four years to go back down to low
levels.
And what that means is that if you've been eating polyunsaturated fat for one, two, three, four
years, your need for vitamin E could stay elevated for the next four years after you quit.
And so, although you may get a lot of benefits in the long term and maybe you'll even get some
benefits in the short term, it's still possible that lingering in the background there's this
potential harm of the transition.
So what do we do about that?
Well let's say for simplicity that over the past four years you've consumed a diet that's thirty
percent fat deriving all of the fat from soybean oil.
Who knows, maybe you consumed forty percent and it was a mix of different oils, but for a simple
calculation, if that's the case, your vitamin E requirement could stay at about 20 IU per day for
the next four years.
Let's say you switch to coconut oil and butter.
You're getting some vitamin E from butter but only enough to protect the polyunsaturated fats in the
butter, which isn't very much.
Coconut oil has practically no vitamin E at all.
So in that case the easiest way to get 20 IU of vitamin E from food would be to consume 4
tablespoons of palm oil per day.
Now that can be great if you like palm oil and if you're willing to eat that much added fat but you
may have goals that require you to eat less added fat or you may want some diversity in the taste of
your food because palm oil has its own taste.
So, is there are more convenient way to hack around this?
There absolutely is.
What I would do is simply as an insurance policy take a low-dose vitamin E supplement for the next
couple of years.
The problem is almost all the vitamin E supplements on the market have enormous quantities of
vitamin E in them that could, although the science isn't totally clear on it, could increase your
need for other fat-soluble vitamins, and you don't really want to mess with that balance.
The vitamin E supplement that I would recommend for this purpose is Jarrow Formulas Toco-Sorb.
Now the thing that I like about this vitamin E supplement is that its amount of alpha-tocopherol is
19 IU and alpha-tocopherol is the most important form of vitamin E and it's the most powerful
antioxidant.
S you want to meet your basic needs for vitamin E largely as alpha-tocopherol and that's just about
the perfect amount.
But it also has these other tocopherols and tocotrienols that reflect the natural blend of vitamin E
forms found in palm oil.
So I think it's great that the blend you get is natural and yet you still know that you're getting
about 20 IU of vitamin E as alpha-tocopherol.
Now, your vitamin E requirement isn't going to stay elevated forever and in fact even across the
four years after you switch from a diet that's mostly vegetable oil to a diet of traditional fats
it's only going to be elevated that much at first and it's going to slowly decline down to the level
that's found in your diet over four years.
So you don't need to take the supplement forever.
Your vitamin E requirement is going to depend on a lot of things like the other things you're eating
in your diet, what your lifestyle is like, what you're exposed to in the environment, your genetics,
and so on.
So you may not need the supplement at all.
However, if you're making that switch it's a good insurance policy and if you have any reason to
feel like your body is subjected to a little bit more wear and tear than you'd like then it's a
pretty good idea to take it.
All right, I hope you found this useful.
Signing off, this is Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com.
You've been watching Chris Masterjohn Lite, and I will see you in the next video.
