Gary Krieger says, "Hi Chris, in your last AMA, you mentioned using milk thistle or sulforaphane to
move iron from serum to ferritin.
Would this be considered a normal physiological option or more a backdoor approach to lower elevated
transferrin saturation?
I understand hypothyroidism and MTHFR single nucleotide polymorphisms can cause elevated
transferrin, transferrin saturation, and low ferritin.
How would you best address these conditions to lower transferrin saturation?
Recent labs of mine put transferrin saturation in the range of 39 to 46 and ferritin 60 to 70, TSH
2.85, reverse T3 18, free T3 mid range.
Thank you." If that was me, I would be giving blood.
And the way that I look at this is I think there's a lot of confusion that is driven by looking at
ferritin as if it's a universal singular marker of iron status, which it is completely not.
I think there's a lot of muddled thinking that that comes around the diagnostic criteria used for
hemochromatosis.
And so, what gets lost in the observation that people with diagnosable hemochromatosis have really
high ferritin, is that the mechanism that begins decades before that's found is that the
communication between elevated transferrin saturation and the hepcidin system that lowers iron
absorption and increases ferritin is broken.
So what should happen if that situation is working correctly, is that as your transferrin saturation
moves up between 30 and 40%, there's a cascade of physiological responses to that, that lower your
iron absorption and that increase your ferritin.
So if you were to find someone when that first happened, not after they had diagnosable
hemochromatosis.
If you were to find someone who was in the initial stages of recognizing that pattern, what you
would find is that their transferrin saturation would be quite high and their ferritin would be much
lower than you would expect it to be.
Because the thing that's broken is the ferritin doesn't respond to the transferrin saturation.
So, the default for me is to read a transferrin saturation that's consistently above 40%.
And now granted 39 to 46 is only a little bit above 40%, right?
So I am homozygous for H63D when I first discovered that I had iron overload issues, my transferrin
saturation was at 55% and I was in my 20s, in my early 20s.
So 39 to 46 is like barely out of the range.
And I guess maybe, I mean, it's not as if giving blood once is dangerous for most cases.
So I don't see that as a problem.
Although, maybe if you're worried about COVID or you hate needles, or you're not, whatever.
You might want to wait it out and see where that goes.
But if that's an increasing trend, I personally am going to, if that were me, I'd be interpreting
that as early iron overload.
And yeah, the ferritin is 60 to 70.
And it'll go down with iron overload, but I mean, with blood donation.
But personally, when I'm concerned about iron overload, I'm okay letting ferritin go down to 20 to
40.
Whereas if I'm concerned about anemia, iron deficiency anemia, I'm not.
I'm going to want to make sure ferritin stays above 60.
So, the question arises: Why does someone...
If in hemochromatosis the communication between high transferrin saturation and ferritin is broken,
why does ferritin go up so high?
And the answer is that oxidative stress results from high free iron, which correlates with high
transferrin saturation.
And it's the oxidative stress that drives the ferritin so high.
And the logic in the last AMA in talking about milk thistle and sulforaphane was to help get the
hormesis or the perception of oxidative stress from those supplements to jack up the oxidative
stress response to get a higher ferritin reaction.
But if your ferritin is 60, 70, and you're giving blood, then you probably want to do what the blood
donation people will already do for you, which is make sure you don't become iron deficient.
But you could enhance that a little bit by making sure that your hemoglobin, hematocrit, red blood
cells, and whatnot, don't go low.
Now, the last thing is, if your transferrin saturation is a little bit high.
You really should make sure that your albumin doesn't run a little bit low.
Because if your albumin and runs a little bit low, it's going to make your transferrin saturation
look a little bit high and it's going to be false.
Transferrin saturation is sort of like calculated LDL.
It's not the thing you want, but most of the time it's good enough.
And so with borderline high transferrin saturation where you're not convinced of iron overload, you
really should look at actual transferrin saturation.
And there's a formula in Testing Nutritional Status: The Ultimate Cheat Sheet to calculate that.
But the measurements required would be, at the same time you get the iron panel, get the serum
transferrin.
And I personally would say, get the, I mean, you could do it just serum iron and serum transferrin,
but my preference would be get serum ferritin, get serum transferrin, and get the iron panel.
That way you can correlate them.
So, you can say when my iron saturation is 40%, what does my transferrin saturation calculate to?
And is iron saturation actually a good proxy or is it not?
And that would require like three measurements where you take them together to look at their
correlation.
So I guess number one would be, see if it's a fake correlation by looking at actual transferrin
saturation.
Number two would be, make sure it's an uptrend and it's not a fluke.
Like if it was 39, it was 46.
Next time it's 37.
It's probably a fluke.
But if it's an uptrend, you probably want to do something about it.
And yes, you could try the...
Someone in that situation could try the Nrf2 stimulators, like milk thistle and sulforaphane.
But if it is a genuine uptrend in early stage iron overload, that might be a situation that giving
blood once a year would be the best solution.
All right.
Thank you, Gary, for your question.
