You may not have known this, but I was on American Ninja Warrior.
I was sitting on the chair right next to everyone watching them do it, wishing that I could.
That's really why I'm wearing this bandana.
But no, to be completely honest, I want to talk to you today about things you can eat at a barbecue
on the 4th of July, because it's a hard one to avoid.
Almost everyone gets invited to some form of a Fourth of July party and is tempted to at least eat
those barbecued foods.
But the cool thing is, and I'm going to explain in detail in this video, if you're cognizant and
you're aware of what you're going to eat at that barbecue, you can actually walk out of that
barbecue looking better and feeling better than if you haven't gone in the first place.
I'm not saying you deliberately need to seek these foods out, but these are the foods that you can
eat that'll keep you on the straight narrow so you don't fall off the wagon.
All right, first one I want to talk about is some grilled asparagus.
No barbecue is truly complete without having some grilled asparagus.
And the benefits of grilled asparagus come down to something known as a asparagene.
What a asparagene is is a powerful powerful diuretic.
And a lot of people might say, why do we want a diuretic?
That doesn't make a lot of sense.
Well, in addition to flushing out excess water, inflammation, and edema that can make you look
better for a pool party, there's also some additional benefits, too.
Okay?
When we look at a sparagene and we look at a diuretic, we have a positive benefit of flushing
metabolic waste.
Whenever you're dieting, whenever you're consuming less food, whenever you're burning fat and going
through that oxidation, you have metabolic waste that compiles in your liver and it compiles in your
bloodstream and your kidneys.
So, if you can flush out the extra minerals and flush out the extra toxins, it's that much easier to
get back on the train to feeling your best.
Okay?
Then, when it comes down to asparagus, there's also some other components that we want to look at.
The next component of grilled asparagus that's powerful is something known as race mofaran.
And what race mopen is is a powerful anti-inflammatory component.
It does some pretty interesting things.
It acts on what is known as the cycllo oxygenase enzyme 1 COX1.
Have you ever taken an aspirin before or an ibuprofen?
Well, that works on the same cycllo oxygenase enzyme 1.
What that is is it's something that reduces inflammation directly within the muscle and directly
within the intestinal tract to start making it so you can recover better.
Well, the benefit of getting that COX1 enzyme inhibition from asparagus rather than an insaid like
an aspirin or an ibuprofen, you're not going to get the stomach bleeding, but you're still going to
get the recovery so that you can feel a heck of a lot better.
Okay.
Then there's another component of asparagus that's really cool, too.
And that's the fact that it has 114% of your daily value of vitamin K.
Now, I really sound like an all-American nerd talking about that.
Vitamin K, though, does a lot of things.
It helps calcium go to the right place in the body.
Otherwise, calcium is floating through your bloodstream, calcifying arteries and triggering anxiety
and triggering a lot of stress.
Yes, calcium is exatory and it causes that.
So, vitamin K is required for vitamin D to dictate where the calcium actually goes, leaving more
room for magnesium to do its job so that you can feel your best.
Okay, let's move on to the next food, and that is getting in enough saturated fat.
Okay, the first thing that comes to mind for most people that are going to a barbecue is going to be
something like a fattier cut of meat.
Okay, maybe it's a ribeye, maybe it's a chicken thigh instead of a chicken breast.
First of all, it's more sustainable, but second of all, it contains the saturated fats that we need.
If you're vegetarian or vegan, there's other options that you can have as well.
You can just add a little bit of coconut oil to the grilled asparagus or add some coconut oil to the
grilled zucchini.
Just make sure you're getting those fats in because they're critical.
You see, 60% of our brain is made up of saturated fats.
If we're not getting that, it's hard for our brain to really have the good development that it
needs.
But even cooler than that, the myelin sheath, which is the component that surrounds the outside of
the nerve, is mainly comprised of saturated fats.
Without that myelin sheath, your brain cannot send the signal to the appropriate part of the body.
Therefore, meaning you're not getting signal transduction that allows you to work out better and
feel better.
Then, of course, there's the good old-fashioned fat loss component of saturated fat.
Eat fat to burn fat, right?
It's like your body is a lawn mower.
The more fat that you eat, you're priming the pump on the lawn mower, encouraging the body to
utilize fats as a source of fuel, which therefore, when you are in a caloric deficit, your body is
more prone to use the fat from your body as a source of fuel than to turn to glucose, allowing the
fat to just stay on the body.
Hopefully, that makes some pretty clear sense.
Now, let's talk about the fruit.
Don't go over to the fruit salad.
Just pick out the watermelon.
Why?
Cuz watermelon is about the easiest food that you can get in without blowing your low carbohydrate
diet.
Simply because when you have a bowl of watermelon, you're really only having like 10 gram of net
carbs.
There's only six grams of net carbs in a half a cup of watermelon.
So a regularized bowl, maybe 10 to 12 at the most.
Barely enough to even blow a low carb diet.
And to add insult to injury and make things better, it's 92% water.
So you're getting some hydration effect and flushing out the excess minerals you don't need anyway.
Then of course we've got lycopine which is the red pigment phyitochemical that's in watermelon.
Huge benefits there too.
What lycopine is going to do is it's helping the blood flow.
It's going to help make it so that your body is able to circulate things better.
In fact, there was even a study that looked at this.
It looked at those that consumed lycopine, older men over the age of 45.
Well, those that consumed lycopine had a 55% lower chance of having a stroke.
Why is this relevant right now?
Because no matter what your age is, first of all, it's important to be cognizant of that.
But second of all, it indicates that you're going to have more blood flow and more cardiovascular
health, which means better workouts, which means better nutrient delivery, which means a better
physique and a better life all around.
Okay.
Then we need to look at something called citrine.
And this is the truly epic part of watermelon.
Citrine not only reduces muscle soreness, but citrilline converts into something known as arginine.
arginine.
You've probably even taken as a supplement before because it helps blood flow.
It helps that muscle pump.
It helps you get more nutrients.
Helps you get a better workout.
That's all fine and dandy, but the real benefit comes from the conversion process itself.
When citrine converts into arginine, it does something epic.
It inhibits the production of something called tissue non-specific alkaline phosphotase, also known
as tenap.
What tinap does is normally encourages fat accumulation.
When we have this arginine conversion, it slows down that process, making it so that it's harder for
your body to store body fat.
Then making matters even better, that arginine has a strong effect on gene expression, making it so
that your genetic code actually doesn't want to store as much fat.
That's pretty darn cool, just coming from watermelon in and of itself.
So, as always, please make sure you let me know what videos you want to see and please make sure to
share this video and leave a comment below and let me know what you think.
Also, let me know other video ideas and if you flat out have questions, post them.
We always reply.
We do the best that we can to take input from you to create the best content available on YouTube.
So, I will see you in the next video.
