Here's the truth on MSG, monos sodium glutamate.
This has been tackled time and time again, probably decades ago, but I wanted to do this video
because I think it needs to be resurfaced because I've been hearing a lot about it lately.
If you go to a buffet, you're sure to be consuming some MSG.
If you go to a Chinese food restaurant, more than likely, you're probably going to consume some MSG.
And I want to explain what it is.
Monos sodium glutamate.
It's really, it's not like a crazy chemical or anything like that.
You see, glutamate is already naturally occurring in a lot of foods like parmesan, tomatoes, peas,
mushrooms.
But what happens is when you add sodium to that glutamate, you get monos sodium glutamate.
And what that does is increase what is called the umami factor.
Now, the umami factor is literally just taste.
Something that ordinarily wouldn't taste that good can suddenly start tasting better if monos sodium
glutamate is in it.
It activates a different portion of our taste buds, but it also triggers a particular reaction with
neurons in our brain that tricks us into thinking that something tastes good.
So, the thing is, it's not so much about the MSG itself being bad.
It's about what it could be masking, you know?
So, you're actually convincing yourself that something tastes good when it might not actually taste
good.
You could literally be eating something rancid or something that's been sitting out there for a
while where normally your body would say, "No, don't eat that once you take a bite." That's the
danger with MSG.
But there have been some pretty interesting studies as well.
One study in particular looked at Chinese restaurant syndrome, which is kind of a funny name, but it
is applicable because Chinese food restaurants are known to have large amounts of MSG in their food.
Well, this study was performed on mice.
And what they did is they fed these mice monos sodium glutamate and they monitored their brain
activity.
Well, they found that there was a lot of brain cell swelling and sometimes ultimately brain cell
death that was directly correlated with increases in MSG.
In other words, the more MSG that was fed, the more brain cells that ultimately died or at least had
swelling.
Now again, this is with mice, so correlation doesn't necessarily mean causation, but it's still a
pretty enlightening study as to the effect of MSG on the brain in general.
So what can you do to help feel better if you're going to have some MSG?
Well, there's something that you can do if you do get MSGed, so to speak, where you go to a Chinese
food restaurant, you suddenly get that feeling of kind of numbness and dizziness that you get from
MSG.
It is being found that large amounts of vitamin C can help counteract that.
Now, it may have something to do with the cortisol levels.
It may have something to do with the neurological calming effect of vitamin C.
But by and large, if you consume some vitamin C or eat some fruit like mangoes or oranges that are
high in vitamin C, it can sort of neutralize that MSG.
So, at the end of the day, that's really your best route.
Also, make sure you drink a lot of water because MSG sometimes can make you retain a little bit of
water.
But don't be mistaken.
More often than not, it's just the sodium in general that's making you retain water, not the MSG.
As always, keep it locked in here on my channel for more tips for going out to restaurants, going
out to eat, so that you can make sure you stay on track no matter the case.
I'll see you soon.
