Dates aren't the same as regular sugar.
They don't respond the same in the body.
Sure, they have sugar.
Sure, they are a carbohydrate.
And at the end of the day, carbohydrates do operate similarly in our body when they're broken down
into pure glucose, fructose, whatever.
But there are key differences here.
They are not potato.
They are very different.
And the thing is is when you look at the literature, it makes some more sense.
Now, it's not just because of the fiber in a date.
Okay, dates, yes, they have fiber.
They are a whole fruit.
So, it's different than just consuming pure table sugar.
But there's something fundamentally different and we will break it all down.
So first we need to look at a study that actually analyzes the difference between fruit juice and a
sugar solution inside the body which is wild because most of us think fruit juice is pure sugar and
fruit juice does have a lot of sugar.
But when we look at it like this it really puts it in a different perspective.
So let's break it down.
And after today's video I also popped a link down below for Arra colostrum which is what I would say
one of the most important supplements when you are fasting.
And the reason is is because after a fast your gut barrier integrity is a little bit compromised.
And that's what colostrum is really most noted for is gut health and gut barrier integrity.
So I've been using colostrum for a long time and specifically Arra because they're the only brand
that still has the bioactive compounds over 400 of them intact because they use a particular cold
processing that doesn't damage the living bioactive compounds that are in colostrum.
So really unique product and that's why it's been making so many waves.
really is the only colostrum product out there that is worth taking, at least in my opinion.
So, that link down below gets you a special discount off Armra.
They've got their travel stick packs, they've got their tubs.
I prefer the orange flavor because it's I don't know, just tastes good.
It kind of tastes like an orange creamsicle and the stick packs really convenient when I'm traveling
and when I know my gut health might be a little bit more compromised or I'll take it a little bit
more often when I'm fasting or a little more stressed.
So, that link down below in the top line of the description.
So this study was published in nutrients and it's an interesting one because it is done in rodents
but it's still very very clear.
Okay, so it's a four-week study where they gave rodents four different kinds of fruit juices or a
sugar solution that they could consume add libitum.
So it was the same amounts of sugar, same concentration, same content of sugar, just one was from
fruit juice and one was from a sugar solution.
With the ad libitum fruit juice, they could consume as much as they wanted to and they saw no
increase in fasting blood glucose.
This is pretty wild because you would expect that there would be an increase there.
Now with the sugar solution, there was an increase in fasting glucose, but that's not where it
stops.
In the sugar solution group, there is an increase in caloric intake that there was not in the fruit
juice group.
And there was also an increase in oxidative stress.
Okay.
Well, maybe that has something to do with the polyphenols that are in the fruit juice that's
protecting from the oxidative stress.
I don't know how you really explain the caloric intake change.
Maybe the difference in fructose versus sucrossse.
But the interesting thing is is that even with sucrose, you're still looking a decent percentage of
fructose because sucrose is a combination of glucose and fructose.
We're not talking pure glucose here.
So, it's actually more of a similar makeup to fruit than people would typically think.
What else is interesting is in the sugar group, there is an increase in weight gain.
There was more weight actually accumulated.
There was an increase in overall hypoglycemia and an increase in insulin resistance.
This is interesting because with the insulin resistance piece, a lot of times it's a which came
first, the chicken or the egg situation with fatty liver and insulin resistance.
And some would say that well fruit juice would give you a fatty liver because of the fructose, but
in this case it was the sugar solution that actually increased insulin resistance implying that
there could be a change in fatty liver.
They didn't test this with this study which would have been interesting to see.
Lastly, there was impaired glycation with the sugar group that wasn't with the fruit group meaning
that it was promoting the activation or the advanced glycation in product effect.
So more glycation.
Now when we look at dates, we do have to understand that in a whole food date, it's going to be
lower glycemic.
That's probably because of fiber, but also a number of different things and how it's ripened.
For example, a study published in diabetes and metabolic syndrome looked at different dates and they
found that like roottop dates are about a 47 on the glycemic index scale.
That's actually pretty low.
Okay.
Then you have tamer dates in a sundried fashion which are about a 45 or so on the glycemic index
scale.
And then you have tamer dates that are more commercially ripened.
you're looking at these down to like a 35 36 on the glycemic index scale.
So, we have a wide variety and then there's even some dates depending on how they're ripened that
can be as high as a 74.
So, I encourage you to do some research.
Maybe you can just Google it or chat GPT it or something where you find like what date kinds are
going to be the lowest GI because yeah, it has to do with fiber, antioxidants, but it could also
just do with how it's ripened.
And even then, it's a negligible difference in the taste in some ways for those that aren't familiar
with dates.
Probably the most profound piece is that dates contain a very small amount of alulose.
Now, alulose is also a little bit in raisins.
It's also a little bit in figs.
Figs and dates happen to be two fruits that I'm a big fan of, particularly figs cuz they're even
lower sugar content than dates.
But this is interesting because because with alulose, there was a cool study published in BMJ where
they took 30 non-diabetic people, okay?
So, regular people that didn't have any like diabetes or insulin resistance, they gave them 50 g of
sucrose.
So 50 gram sucrossse bullis and then they gave them 2 and 1 half grams or 5 grams or 7 and 1 half
grams or 10 grams of dialos.
What they found is that in a dose dependent fashion alulose brought their blood sugar down and 30
minutes after consumption actually brought their insulin levels down too indicating that it was
actually helping the clearance of glucose.
Now I've talked about alulus before on this channel but in this particular case the reason it's
probably having this profound effect with dates is three-fold.
One there is an increase in GLP1 activity.
So more GLP-1 having an oythic like effect.
Okay.
So GLP1 therefore making it so that you're more satiated, you possibly eat less but also end up
clearing the glucose and putting it where it needs to go better.
Second, it inhibits alphaglucosides which means it literally slows down the breakdown of the
carbohydrates a little bit more.
And thirdly, it binds to the glute 2 receptor.
Now the glute 2 receptor is interesting because it takes glucose predominantly and puts it in the
liver.
Now, glute 2 receptors have a very low affinity for sugar, but a high capacity.
And what that means is that they in the presence of high blood sugar, they can soak up a lot of the
overage.
So, they're very good at taking that extra and putting it somewhere else.
So, they help it get into the liver.
So if they take and they occupy that glute 2 receptor with alulose, you're reducing the amount of
sugar that's going into the liver, which thereby means you could help prevent more in the way of
insulin resistance, but you could also help clear that glucose so it doesn't contribute to extra
sugar in the liver.
So then it's actually able to be utilized by other cells and possibly just reducing it at all and
thereby allowing other glucose transporters to put it into the muscle cells.
One of the most interesting things about dates is if you eat a whole date and you also get the date
seeds, there's interesting evidence on the antioxidant profile of the date seeds themselves or the
date seed extract.
And with this, we look at a study published in scientific reports.
It was mechanistic, but it looked at the impact of date seeds on the pancreas.
So, this study found that date seeds decrease the oxidative stress and decrease the inflammation in
the pancreas and thereby allowed the pancreatic eyelet cells to produce more insulin.
This is tremendous because again from an insulin resistance standpoint it's allowing the pancreas to
produce more insulin which allows the body to deal with glucose better which subsequently longterm
requires less insulin to be produced because you retain or regain that sensitivity and you don't
have this vicious cycle happening anymore.
There's also a few other really interesting things about dates.
For one, they're very high in beta glucans.
Betaglucans are a type of sugarish they technically a sugar I guess prebiotic fiber however you want
to classify them.
like multiple glucose molecules that are bound together but we cannot activate them or access them
because we don't have the enzyme to unlock all those glucose molecules bound together.
So essentially it forms a gel.
So you think like oatmeal high in betlucans that's why it gets gelatinous and weird.
So when you eat dates it forms a gelatinous like substance in your gut that actually makes it harder
to absorb the sugar.
Then you also have galacto maninonin which is another interesting compound that forms a gel-like
substance.
So dates when they're in our gut we probably don't absorb all the sugar.
That's probably what's quite interesting about it and why they don't have the same blood sugar
impact.
Now, they're still sugar.
So, please keep in mind, I don't think you should just go out willy-nilly eating all of them.
But also, the sapinins that are in dates have a profound effect on oxidative stress and
inflammation.
So, at the end of the day, I hope you're sticking with me through this whole video.
Know that dates are still sugar.
And if you have insulin resistance or you're dealing with blood sugar issues, I don't suggest you go
and eat a handful of them.
But if you're trying to sweeten something and you really want sugar, perhaps using date sugar or
even whole mashed dates is just a better option for you.
