Hi!
I’m Dr.
Chris Masterjohn of ChrisMasterjohnPhD.Com and you're watching Chris Masterjohn Lite where the name
of the game is “Details?
Shmetails." "Just tell me what works!” And today we’re talking about how to get over that afternoon
crash.
Here are a few tips I have.
Number one.
Eat a meal for lunch that is relatively modest in size, relatively high in protein, and relatively
low in carbohydrate.
And what I mean by that is 30 to 40 g of protein, 10 to 20 g of carbs, and fill the remainder with
fat make it just large enough to take the edge off of your hunger and no more than that, and make
sure it's foods you digest well.
The reasons are protein stimulates the waking signal in your brain, and carbohydrate shuts it down.
Now of course when you wake up in the morning you may feel like carbs wake you up a little bit and
that's because you need to get your blood sugar up, but in the afternoon when the waking signal in
your brain is already taking a dip, because maybe we’re hardwired to take a siesta at that time, and
then we throw a bunch of carbohydrate on it and make it dip even more and we’ve been working all day
and so the pressure to need some sleep is building, that can be the perfect storm to make us crash
in the afternoon.
So that's a time when you want to try to up the protein, take away some of the carbs and of course
you don’t want the meal to be so full that that weighs you down you don’t want it to be things that
are hard to digest because that’s going to direct your energy towards digestion.
Now that's step one.
Step two is a cold shower.
I take a cold shower almost every morning and I don’t usually take one in the afternoon but on rare
occasions when I’m feeling an afternoon crash and I really need to power through it, nothing is
anywhere near as effective as a cold shower It boosts my mood wakes me up Be forewarned it's rather
intense If you're not used to it make sure you don't have any medical conditions that would
interfere with it if you're frail or you have a slippery shower floor and you could get surprised
and go “ahhh!” and fall, take proper precautions.
But a cold shower is a great way to wake up from a crash and hey desperate times call for desperate
measures .
Now there's a few tips I have that maybe you want to hear but I’m gonna give ‘em anyway.
Number one: sleep more.
I think a lot of us aren't sleeping well and we’re not sleeping enough and we may feel that we have
so much to do we just can't afford to sleep the one or two extra hours of the morning that our
bodies are telling us it wants, but part of the reason that we have an afternoon crash is because we
have cumulative sleep pressure that’s building and we’re not sleeping enough to get rid of it.
So while the cold shower and the meal that I recommended may help, we still need to address the
fundamentals and that’s sleeping enough and sleeping well.
Number two: take a nap.
Maybe you don't want to hear that because you want to be really productive in the afternoon and
maybe your boss doesn't want you to hear that because your boss doesn’t want you taking a nap in the
office but still hey if you’re sleepy in the afternoon, that’s your body telling you it’s time to
take a nap.
So I think it's great to try to design meals and to try to design showers around powering through
the afternoon nap and yeah when I’m working on a creative project I want to power through it but I
don't think we should always be trying to power through every time our body makes us feel sleepy.
At some point we need to say hey, I powered through it enough, now I’m going to start giving the
body the rest that it needs, and that's when at least some of the time you want to take a nap when
your body’s telling you it wants a nap.
And the last tip is, have a cup of coffee.
Well I mean maybe you wanted to hear that, but maybe it didn't help that much because you were
probably already doing that, but hey, I love coffee so have a cup of coffee.
All right that’s it.
You’ve been watching Chris Masterjohn Lite, I will see you in the next video.
