Kelp.
It's the reason I became a mermaid.
And if you've ever wanted to be a mermaid or you've ever idolized mermaids, well, you probably know
that they consume a lot of kelp and a lot of iodine.
All right, enough weirdo talk.
I'm seriously going to talk about kelp.
I'm going to talk about iodine, how it affects your thyroid.
But I want to put this out there.
If you know someone that's dealing with hypothyroidism where they have a slow thyroid or an
underactive thyroid or maybe even Hashimoto's like an autoimmune condition, give this video a quick
share just so that it can get out there.
Share it with your friends and family.
All right.
So, the way that it works when it comes to iodine is the thyroid needs it.
Okay?
The thyroid needs iodine in order to convert T4 into T3.
And what T4 is is basically the precursor to thyroid hormone T3.
And for those of you that don't know, the thyroid is that butterflyshaped gland that's in your
throat that really is a standalone gland.
It doesn't even have blood supply.
It just kind of sits there standalone creating thyroid hormone that is what regulates our
metabolism, regulates our body heat, and also regulates a lot of neural function and a lot of brain
function too.
So why kelp though?
Okay, any kind of sea plant or sea algae is going to be higher in minerals in general simply because
the soil isn't totally depleted like it is up here on Earth.
down in the water, you have that retainment of minerals.
So the seaweeds, so the kelp, so the things like that, the algae, they have a lot more minerals in
general, specifically iodine.
Now, we know that we have an iodine issue to begin with, okay?
We've been adding iodine to salt for so many years.
We've been adding it since the early 1900s.
That's not the best way to get it.
You see, we've been told that we can give kelp to our dogs to help with their dog thyroids.
But how come we haven't made the translation that we need it for us?
Well, here's how it actually works.
You see, iodine is good for the thyroid, but only in moderation.
That iodine affects the thyroid by working on something that's called thyroid peroxidase, okay?
Also known as TPO.
It downregulates and it slows down that enzyatic activity, which is good if you're hypothyroid
because it allows your thyroid to regulate and work on its own a little bit better.
Essentially making it stronger and making it more efficient.
So you can create more T3 from less T4 essentially.
But this is a huge thing that you have to consider.
If you're dealing with Hashimoto or you're dealing with any kind of autoimmune disease,
downregulating that TPO can affect those TPO antibodies and actually increase the stress on your
thyroid.
So, this essentially can increase the autoimmune attack on the thyroid.
Well, there is a study that I like to reference that kind of balances out that whole thyroid thing
with the iodine and the selenium and all that stuff.
Essentially what that is is researchers found was that by taking in too much iodine they had a
decrease in what was called selenocyine levels in the thyroid.
These selenocyine levels are again what help the thyroid produce more of the thyroid hormone.
How is this balanced out?
Simply by taking selenium.
You see what we want to do is we want to rise the tide so that all ships rise.
If we take in iodine we want to be taking in selenium as well.
And the good thing is kelp has a good balance of iodine and selenium.
So, you're not just getting too much iodine like you would be getting from a supplement.
You're getting a good balance of selenium as well.
But full disclaimer, it's safe for me to say that if you're going to be taking in any iodine, you
may want to take a selenium supplement as well.
And I have to give you full disclosure.
I'm not a doctor.
So, don't go taking a ton of iodine.
And realistically, don't want to be exceeding 500 micrograms of iodine per day anyway.
Although there are some research studies out there that show you can take up to 12 milligrams.
Me being in the position that I'm in, I highly recommend against that.
You want to make sure that you're starting small and start regulating how you feel.
So, if you're going to take a kelp supplement, what you want to do is you want to start small.
Maybe take a half a tab or try using a kelp powder so that you can really modulate how much you take
and just closely monitor your thyroid.
Another thing that you can do is you can take a thermometer and you can literally put it in your
armpit first thing in the morning or under your tongue depending which kind of thermometer you're
using and monitor your actual body temperature.
Then start taking a kelp supplement.
If your body temperature starts to increase, then more than likely you are thyroid deficient and
you're getting some benefit out of the iodine and the selenium or out of the kelp in this case.
Now, if you start to see that it plateaus or it starts to drop, well then you might be dealing with
an autoimmune issue and you may want to pay a little bit more attention to working on your
antibodies versus working on the thyroid directly.
So, at the end of the day, why should you take kelp?
Because you're going to get a balance of minerals that's going to help your mood.
It's going to help your body.
It's going to help your nerve function.
and it's going to give your thyroid that boost that it needs.
So, as always, keep it locked in here.
And if you know someone that's going to get a benefit out of helping their thyroid by becoming a
mermaid, please make sure you give this video a share.
I'll see you soon.
