The winner this time around is from R.B.
who has a question about brain fog.
R.B.
says, "I've noticed that I experienced brain fog, for example, forgetfulness, losing my train of
thought, trouble recollecting and articulating words when I increase supplemental vitamin D, calcium
or vitamin K2.
Do you know why this might occur and what might mitigate it?
Can this be caused by gut issues?
Does this indicate I should not increase supplementation even if I'm below the RDA?
For example, my dietary calcium is below the RDA." This happens at pretty low doses for me.
For example, at supplemental vitamin D at 880 to 2000 IU, calcium at 150 milligrams, vitamin K2 at
180 micrograms of MK-7 and individually for any one of those supplements when taken alone, as well
as when taking them all together.
This type of question is not so amenable to research and is much more amenable to trying to
brainstorm the pattern that makes sense given your situation and all the other things we know about
your case.
I spent the time thinking about it rather than researching it because you're not going to find
studies on supplementing low-dose calcium causing brain fog.
When I look at the pattern that emerges here, there is a very specific grouping where if you think
about all the work that I've done laying out how vitamins A, D and K2 interact to impact the calcium
phosphorous economy, you have two-thirds of the grouping missing the two others.
Specifically, you have vitamin D, vitamin K2, and calcium, and you don't have vitamin A and
phosphorus.
I'm inclined to think that there is some kind of imbalance here between the two.
From things that we've discussed about your case in the past, it makes sense to think about vitamin
A because of the collection of symptoms that you have and the response that you have to vitamin A
where we know that you seem to need higher amounts of vitamin A than we would expect to resolve
vitamin A deficiency symptoms.
Now, I would also think about something that I've written but not for a very long time.
If you go back to the beginning of my work on the fat soluble vitamins, well the beginning of my
work on the interaction of the fat soluble vitamins, so circa 2004, I started writing about fat
soluble vitamins in general.
My first article that I ever wrote on nutrition science was Vitamin A: The Forgotten Body Building
Nutrient for the Men's Health Issue of Wise Traditions, the Journal of the Weston A.
Price Foundation, but it was in 2006 to '07 and to some extent, the years after that, but especially
2006 to 2007 where I did my most important work.
The run up to my most important work was my article on vitamin A and osteoporosis.
That was the precursor to my work that incorporates vitamin D and K2 in 2007 and the ...
or well, culminating with the Activator X article in 2007, Identifying the Activator X of Weston A.
Price's Vitamin K2.
If you go back to the article on vitamin A and osteoporosis, one of the things that you see is that
vitamins A and D in animal experiments, their balance seems to influence the balance of calcium and
phosphorus in the blood so that although the big picture is that the cooperation of vitamins A, D
and K2 helps to put calcium and phosphorus into the bone and prevent them from depositing in soft
tissues.
I've often talked about this in a shortcut as to say calcium, but when calcium winds up in the bone,
it's in a complex with phosphorus.
When calcium deposits in tissues, it is generally in a complex with phosphorus.
It can also be in a complex, of course, with oxalate, and there are many other things that will in
influence what calcium deposits as including the amount of oxalate that's circulating, the pH of the
urine and things like that.
But generally, calcium and phosphorus exist in a pair wherever they go; in the gut, in the blood, in
the bones.
You can have calcium phosphate deposition in all the soft tissues; the kidneys, the arteries, et
cetera, cartilage where it doesn't belong.
You're trying to prevent that and promote it going into the bone.
But a nuance here is that if you have vitamin A or vitamin D completely out of balance, you're way
more likely to get calcium pumping up in the blood versus phosphorus when you have vitamin D.
You are way more likely to get phosphorus pumping up in the blood relative to calcium when you have
a lot of vitamin A and you're deficient in vitamin D.
Now, that then leads me to think, "Well, okay, do vitamins ...
what would impact brain fog?" It's definitely the case vitamin A regulates brain function in
critically important ways, and I'll post a link that reviews some of the general evidence on vitamin
A and brain function.
But I'm inclined to think that if you're getting an acute impact of a supplement that phosphorus is
more relevant because the serum level of phosphorus, any charged ion in the serum is an electrolyte
and any imbalance in any electrolyte will cause acute problems during the time that it goes up and
down in the serum.
I think this is a mistake that's very frequently made in the functional medicine community where
there tends to be this belief that conventional medicine does everything wrong and conventional
medicine measures serum levels of things.
The reason this must be wrong is because what you care about is whether nutrients are doing their
function inside cells.
That's very wrongheaded because although there's a kernel of truth to it, which is yes, you need
these things inside cells, every single electrolyte in the blood especially has very specific roles
of being in the blood.
There are relatively narrow concentrations of all these things that need to be in the blood before
things go wrong.
Things can go wrong because, well, anything being off in the blood is going to cause the levels off
in the brain because the brain transport of many things is proportional to the blood concentration
rather than very regulated ...
Glucose, for example, if you take up glucose into your muscle that's driven by the demand of the
muscle and it's driven by the signaling from insulin about the supply, neither of those things are
true in the brain.
More glucose in the blood means more glucose in the brain.
Less glucose in the blood means less glucose in the brain, end of story.
There's probably a lot of analogy to that with some of the electrolytes, and then also, most of the
electrolytes, not phosphorus so much, but most of the electrolytes are playing some role in
regulating nerve function.
So just if you're trying to contract a muscle, for example, you're dealing with especially sodium
potassium chloride to a lesser extent, magnesium and calcium that are basically transmitting the
signal from start to finish to the release of the neurotransmitter.
Then the ions come back into play once the neurotransmitter reaches the muscle cell and tells it to
contract.
I think with phosphorus probably what is more relevant to the feeling of brain fog, I'm going to
guess, is whether you have the phosphorus supply to energy- demanding tissues such as the brain
being affected by the balance between the serum and the bone.
So I think that having the vitamin D to vitamin A ratio imbalanced in favor of more vitamin D less
vitamin A is in itself going to compromise you in the direction of hypophosphatemia and that if you
do anything to shift calcium into the bone, it is going to go into the bone with phosphorus.
So you will be shifting phosphorous into the bone at the expense of the serum, and if it's in the
bone at the expense of the serum, that means it's also at the expense of every tissue that would
take it up from the serum.
That could be the brain where the peripheral nervous system or the muscles and so on.
Low phosphorus means low ATP, means declining energy expenditure in whatever tissue it's impacting.
So if it's in the brain, I would think in the brain is where that would drive brain fog in the
muscles that would drive fatigue or dysregulated muscle function like tremors or things like that.
Knowing that you have vitamin A deficiency symptoms and seem to need high amounts of vitamin A to
get them under control makes me think that you're perpetually in the margin.
Even if you're at the point where you've gotten them all under control, you're still probably
marginally vitamin A deficient.
If you've just gotten rid of the clinical symptoms at the level you're at, you basically have no
reserves against the negative symptoms.
You're at the exact point of having resolved them.
If you're below that point, you're at negative reserves, and these vitamin D levels aren't that
small.
A 2000 IU is a fairly reasonable dose of vitamin D relative to the average person's requirement.
150 milligrams of calcium is really small because there you're at something on the order of an
eighth of the average requirement.
K2 180 micrograms, I think that's fairly at the requirement in terms of a chronic sense, but it does
surprise me a little bit how low the dose is because when I'm thinking of what it would be doing, a
high dose of MK-4, if you were mainlining menatetrenone, synthetic MK-4 45 milligrams a day, I know
that you're getting pharmacological inhibition of bone resorption which would shift phosphorus into
the bone because remember, you don't really care about whether you took the nutrient and then the
ions of phosphorus that were currently in the blood went into the bone, you just care whether
there's a net shift in the balance.
So because you're always engaging in bone resorption and bone growth and it's always going back and
forth, it doesn't matter whether you kept phosphorus from coming out of the bone or put phosphorus
into the bone because it's always going back and forth.
If you shut off bone resorption, you have, as a result of that, a net transfer of phosphorus into
the bone because you always have it going in, you always have it coming out, you stopped it from
coming out.
That means more phosphorus winds up with a bone in less in the serum while it's having that effect.
That's real easy to see from a high dose of MK-4 because we know it's a pharmacological inhibitor of
bone resorption.
I would think 180 micrograms of MK-7 is just acting as an enzymatic co-factor with no real gene
expression.
I'm not saying no gene expression, because gene expression is mediated by MK-4 likely, so some of
this MK-7 is converted into MK-4 and it will alter gene expression.
But it just surprises me because I wouldn't think you would get a very meaningful, quantitatively
impactful change in gene expression.
But it may be that maybe your MGP levels Matrix Gla protein, which is the protein that shifts
calcium around between the different tissues that favors calcium going into bone and not into
cartilage and blood vessels and kidney and other soft tissues maybe that you chronically have that
elevated beyond what the vitamin K is there to activate.
So when you put the vitamin K in, you have a sudden increase in the activation of that protein in a
short time scale that does alter the calcium phosphorus balance.
I do think that happens because my suspicion remains the people who are getting heart palpitations
from 180 micrograms of MK-7, and I have since heard of people getting the same exact symptom of
heart palpitations from MK-4 as well.
I do think the likely explanation for that is shifting calcium into the bone away from the serum.
If your vulnerability is hypocalcemia, then you are making yourself hypocalcemic with the K2.
But in your case, due to your unusually high need for vitamin A, I think that your marginal deficit
or your vulnerability is probably hypophosphatemia rather than hypocalcemia.
That's wildly consistent with your past experience of relatively normal vitamin D causing
hypercalcemia, and hypercalcemia will, in general, bias you towards hypophosphatemia because the
more calcium you have, the more it'll bind the phosphorus and deposit somewhere.
If it deposits somewhere, it's being taken out of the blood.
So if you have hypercalcemia, it's very likely to drive your phosphorus low because probably your
hypercalcemia was up here, but then, and if your phosphorus was in the normal range calcium complex
with phosphorus to go into the tissues and now your calcium's still elevated, so it's just not as
elevated as it would've been if it didn't complex with the phosphorus.
Now your phosphorus is brought from the normal range into the low range.
Given that that's been your passive vulnerability, if you're avoiding that level of hypercalcemia,
then you might not be in it, but your vulnerability at the margins is for something to throw you
into hypophosphatemia rather than into hypocalcemia.
So like the other class of people who get heart palpitations from 180 micrograms of MK-7, you are
getting hypophosphatemic symptoms from MK-7 that's resulting in brain fog, so that's what I think is
going on there.
To go through some of the comment thread on this, Iris from Denmark said, "I have the same issue
regarding calcium.
I get brain fog and other issues when I raise it, even though I'm only raising it to a level where a
parathyroid test is fine.
That's a test that shows if you have enough calcium or lack of vitamin D.
For me, copper has worked and made me able to raise my calcium intake without problems, but I don't
know why I have to eat 10 milligrams of copper a day.
I also get skin rashes, more fungal infections and nerve pains when raising calcium.
Again, copper has helped." I think this is a different problem.
One thing that I'd note is the amount of calcium that should maximally suppress your parathyroid is
a lot higher than 150 milligrams for most people.
You didn't state the milligram amount of calcium that you're getting.
Obviously your diet and supplements are interacting together, so I don't know what R.B.'s normal
calcium intake from food is on top of which this 150 milligrams is acting.
But to take the 150 milligrams alone, that's way below what you would need to optimize your
parathyroid hormone.
I also think if you need 10 milligrams of copper a day, and Iris, I know earlier you had higher
amounts of copper, so this is on the back end, I believe, of reducing the dose, then this suggests
to me that you have a defect in copper transport that you're treating with high dose copper and that
that calcium might be acutely hurting the copper transport, so I'm not sure of that.
I spent most of my prep time thinking about R.B.'s case because that was the core question that got
voted on.
But my first suspicion would be really calcium, it's a positively charged ion that has ...
it comes in fairly high amounts.
Even 150 milligrams is a low dose of calcium and it's 15 times the very high dose of copper you're
getting at 10 milligrams.
Because it's in such higher amounts, high amounts of calcium can overwhelm certain transporters.
I don't think a normal amount of calcium should overwhelm any of the gut transporters, but if you
have a defective copper transporter, then it might be that that transporter's defect does make it
more vulnerable to copper to calcium inhibition.
In other words, if it's maybe what is defective about it is the characteristics that make it high
affinity for copper relative to calcium.
So that means that its differential affinity for copper versus calcium is now blunted.
It's like a lot of the gene defects are thermo-labile gene defects, which means that the enzyme is
damaged by heat more easily than it should be.
If they cause defects in metabolism under normal conditions, that means that the thermal ability is
vulnerable to body temperature.
MTHFR is an example of this.
It's C677T mutation of MTHFR.
This is going off on a tangent, but I think it illustrates the copper principle that I'm trying to
get at.
The C677T polymorphism in MTHFR is thermo-labile.
The reason you get a 75% decrease in activity if you're homozygous is because your body temperature
is too hot for the enzyme to function.
So you would almost certainly get another 15 or 20% decrease in enzymatic activity if you stay in a
sauna long enough to raise your core body temperature by a degree or degree-and-a-half or something
like that.
The analogy I'm trying to make is that a normal amount of calcium should not inhibit copper
transport.
Mega dosing calcium, sure, but a normal amount of calcium should not inhibit copper transport, but
you might have a defect in the copper transport that is hurting the differential, it's hurting the
specificity of the transporter.
I'm speculating here, totally speculating here, but if the defect in the transporter is the
specificity for copper, then that might mean that the normal amount of calcium in the diet that is
helpful becomes an impingement on copper absorption in the same way that normal body temperature
becomes an impingement on MTHFR function if you're homozygous versus 677T, so hope that helps.
Real quickly through the other comments, R.B.
says, "Very interesting, you experienced the same thing with calcium also in case it helps, I was
using vitamin D from ...
" and she gives the brands.
I'm not going to go through this because I think we covered it very well, so I don't think the
brands are that important.
In fact, I think it's notable that peer encapsulations, from my experience, which is where R.B.
is getting calcium citrate, from my experience, people who have idiosyncratic reactions to
supplements often don't have those reactions to pure encapsulations.
So I think the fact that you were using pure encapsulations for the calcium citrate really
underscores that this was a real effect of calcium.
Of course, it could be an effect of citrate, but that's doubtful to me because the main way you
increase citrate in your body is to eat food, especially carbohydrate, and so I don't think it's
that.
You asked about gut function, it could be something in the gut, but I'm looking for what do these
three things have in common rather than what are all the possible ways that each one of them could
potentially impact brain fog?
There could be some idiosyncratic gut metabolism of all three of them producing some kind of toxic
thing.
But I think it's, if I'm trying to draw the dots together to come up with an explanation, I arrive
at the one that I just gave you.
That was a winning question.
