What the heck is food noise?
Food noise is like when you've got so much coming at you with food, it's hard to actually even
concentrate on if you're hungry or not.
That's one of the things that Ozempic helps with, right?
That's what it's kind of known for.
Sure, there's the GLP-1 effect where it literally makes it harder to eat, but then you're not
thinking about food all the time, right?
There's just ways that it does that and affects the brain.
Turns out that certain kinds of mustard, which we'll talk about later on in the video, like what
kinds of mustard, can do this too, but they do it through making your brain think that food is more
satisfying.
So, it can really have major appetite suppressing effects.
That's why it's so funny because you look at bodybuilders and a lot of times like they will eat
things with just mustard as the basic condiment.
And I've done that and I thought before it was just to make bland food taste decent, but it turns
out there was a pretty new study published in the International Journal of Food Science and
Technology in just 2024 that looked at humans, 90 humans, and the impact of mustard on their
appetite.
So, we'll go ahead and break this all down.
If you don't mind, drop a quick comment for the algorithm.
It really helps these videos get out there.
It makes a big, big difference since YouTube just likes engagement these days.
So, make it a habit, drop a quick comment, say hello, say thank you, leave your feedback, whatever.
Okay, so what this study did is 90 different subjects consumed different things, but AITCs, which is
the active component in mustard that really gives it that effect in our body.
Okay, so the AITCs, also known as allyl isothiocyanates, what these AITCs do is they trigger the
nervous system to turn on in some ways.
But, that's cool from a fat loss perspective, but from an actual appetite perspective, they found
that mustard changed the perception of taste.
Now, what it particularly did that was very fascinating was it attenuated the sweetness.
It made things not taste as sweet to people.
And not just in administration literally with the mustard at the same time, but like if someone had
say a burger patty with some mustard on it, then something sweet just didn't have the same
perception as being sweet.
Like it just didn't have the same effect.
So, they were less likely to eat more of those sweet things.
But, it also increased the perception of salt, which is fascinating because salt drives a lot of our
appetite.
Like you ever get to those points where you're just like I'm craving salt.
I need to have salt.
Well, you think about it, if you were getting {quote} satisfied with enough of that salt taste, you
may not overeat.
So, that's what we're seeing with this.
It actually sort of decreased the likeness of food, food noise.
Like that's quite literally what Ozempic is doing at the brain level is it's decreasing the food
noise.
You're not so hyper obsessed with food that you're able to think clear.
So, putting a little bit of mustard, essentially what it's doing is it's so much pungent activity
and so much flavor hitting two different receptors, the TRPV1 receptors, which turn on the
sympathetic nervous system, and the TRPA1 receptors.
And these receptors receive a signal for chemical irritants.
So, basically it's like this is irritating.
It's too sour and pungent and vinegary and what is it?
So, the brain sort of says, I'm good.
I'm good.
We forget how much the brain controls these things when it comes to appetite.
So much so that like with salt, for example, salt is a way to curb your appetite.
People don't realize this, but like if you're hungry, you have some salt, pure salt in some water or
like element electrolytes or some kind of salty thing that doesn't have a lot of calories and watch
your appetite just go down.
There's gustatory signals that occur from the gut to the brain with salt because it's so important
for us.
I put a link down below for the element electrolytes I mentioned too.
I've been using them for 7 years, guys.
So, like they are a staple for me every single dang day because they curb my appetite.
I'm getting hungry, I sip on some electrolytes, it eliminates that food noise, and I can kind of
make better decisions, not to mention I'm getting hydrated.
So, that link, drinklmnt.com/thomas is actually for a free sample variety pack.
So, you get a sample variety pack with any purchase from element.
So, check them out down below.
It really is a staple for me and I think it just becomes like nature for me to just have an element
packet.
Or if I don't have access to one, I might have some regular salt, but it's really convenient cuz
they taste damn good, too.
Now, from a sweet perspective, things can get really fascinating, too.
So, imagine like you were having something and that was really sweet.
You kind of get these feelings of like once that first bit of sweetness hits your tongue, you want
more, right?
And I'll use an example for myself, right?
A lot of times like I fast.
I'll intermittent fast or I do various kinds of fasting, and I will be perfectly satisfied and don't
need food, but the moment that I have some food, it's like the floodgates open.
The brain turns on and it says, yes, I need this.
Please give it to me.
Now, I notice anecdotally a significant difference in when I have something that's like salty and
protein versus something sweet right out the gate.
If I have a moment of weakness and break my fast with something sweet, it is on.
Like it is on like Donkey Kong and I just want to eat everything because that sweet sensation is
also giving us a little bit of a dopamine hit that we don't get from other foods as much.
So, think about it where as mustard can be something that desensitizes us to sweetness, so we're not
getting as much of a dopamine hit.
Now, there's no literature that I could find on that.
I'm playing a little bit of a game of connect the dots here, but I've also tried this stuff myself.
Now, let me give you an example of how this kind of works, too.
When you're fasting, you don't usually have this big appetite.
Or if you're exercising, you don't usually have a big appetite.
You may know you need to fuel, but you don't have an appetite.
That's because you're in sympathetic tone.
Your sympathetic nervous system's kicked on.
And that's exactly what happens with mustard.
Now, some of the special forces operators that I work with, I work with tier one special forces
operators in a lot of different capacities, but one of the things that I learned from them is
sometimes they will carry spicy mustard packets with them because if they get a muscle cramp, they
will have mustard.
And because it activates that TRPV1 receptor, it can actually turn off the muscle cramp because the
central nervous system kicks on and it kind of directs it to a different area.
So, spicy and pungent can stop a muscle cramp, which is kind of fascinating.
Now, the cramp could come back, but it could unlock that cramp really from being debilitating.
It's a good example of illustrating like what happens to the nervous system, right?
And it's doing that at the brain level, too.
It's like hijacking your brain away from food obsession for a moment, which is really fascinating.
Now, real quickly, the kinds of mustard you want to pick.
I've talked about this in other videos.
You have to get stone ground mustard or the whole grain mustard or Dijon mustard, really.
Spicy mustard kind of works, but yellow mustard does not work the same because it does not have the
active component.
It does not have the AITC because it's made from mustard flour.
So, just simply put, when you look at the ingredients, you want to see ground mustard seed or whole
mustard seed.
And you want to see black or brown mustard seed.
Yellow mustard has a very low myrosinase content, which is the enzyme that actually activates this
whole stuff in the first place.
The vinegaryness in mustard can actually do it to a certain degree, but not nearly as much as this
AITC can.
So, as always, keep it locked in here on my channel.
See you tomorrow.
