For years we've been told that's solution is to go for a gentle walk after eating carbs.
And that's not bad advice.
But what if I told you that's like bringing a garden hose to a fire fight?
What if there was a simple 60-second, maybe even 30-second trick that you could do using nothing but
your own body weight that could act like a high-powered vacuum for the blood sugar that's floating
around in your bloodstream?
A trick that can immediately tell your body to shuttle the food that you just ate into the muscles
instead of converting it into fat via de novo lipogenesis.
What if there was also something that you could do with literally mineral water that changes the
insulin management game forever?
Today we're going to break down the science of how to literally force glucose into your muscles on
command.
It puts you back in the driver's seat.
So here's the game plan for this video.
First I'm going to show you the specific push-up or squat trick to do right after you eat that is
far more powerful than just walking.
Secondly, I'll reveal an additional mineral water trick.
How a specific kind of water and even specific kind of minerals can make the insulin that your body
does release work smarter, not harder.
And then finally, I'm going to explain the one time of day that you can strategically use carbs to
fuel your workouts and build muscle all while completely bypassing the normal fat storage pathways.
You're going to want to check this whole thing out.
So let's dive in.
Let's start with the post-meal trick.
We need to understand how your muscles get fuel.
Normally, when you eat carbs, your blood sugar rises and your body releases insulin.
That's a normal functioning metabolism.
Insulin then travels to your muscle cells and it acts like a key.
It unlocks these special doors on the muscle that are called GLUT4 transporters.
These open up and then they allow glucose to come inside.
So insulin is the key, GLUT4 is the door, simple enough.
But if your insulin resistant, this changes.
What if your locks are rusty and the key doesn't work so well?
You know what that feels like, right?
Then the glucose gets left floating in your bloodstream and then it ends up triggering inflammation,
glycation, it gets stored as fat.
And this is where we face problems.
This is where bad things happen and where our metabolism gets off the rails like a runaway train.
But this is also where the magic can happen.
Your muscles have a secret back door.
They have like an emergency override switch.
There was a fascinating review that was published in the journal Molecular Metabolism and it broke
down how this works.
When you contract your muscles intensely, you can force those GLUT4 doors open without needing any
insulin at all.
So here's how it works.
When you do a push-up or a squat, even with just your body weight, your muscles burn through their
immediate fuel source.
This is a molecule called ATP, which we've probably heard of before.
This flips a switch on a powerful master sensor inside your cells that's called AMPK.
And if you think of AMPK as your body's fuel gauge, it makes some sense.
When it senses that energy is being used up, especially rapidly, it panics a little bit.
It sends out an emergency signal that says, "We need fuel in this muscle now because we're running
out of it." That signal travels directly to the GLUT4 transporters and commands them to move to the
cell surface and open up, completely bypassing the need for insulin.
So then why should we be doing push-ups or squatting instead of simply walking?
Isn't that a muscle contraction, too?
Sort of, okay.
So a casual walk burns some energy, okay?
But it doesn't activate AMPK to the same degree, right?
You're just helping a little glucose get into the bloodstream compared to like a few short intense
muscle contractions that you get from push-ups or squats.
So here's the trick.
As soon as you finish your meal, don't sit down.
Instead, just do two or three sets of literal body weight exercises.
Like and you want to kind of take it close to failure if you can.
Just drop down and do push-ups.
If it's hard to do 10 push-ups, that's actually even better because then 10 push-ups is going to get
you close to failure.
This could be air squats, it could be push-ups, it could be lunges, whatever.
The goal is to get somewhat of a burn in the largest muscles, like your legs, maybe your chest,
maybe your back.
This intense short burst of effort is what flips the AMPK switch hard.
It's a lot better than going out and sprinting, right?
You're turning the muscles into a glucose sucking sponge for the next 15, 20 minutes, possibly even
the next hour.
But what if we could make the insulin that your body does release work even better?
What if we could give it a clean, crisp signal every single time?
And that's where a specific type of water comes in.
So let's talk about a mineral that you probably haven't thought much about, calcium.
Now before we get into the exact specifics of how calcium works and how this whole process works
with mineral water, I did put a link down below for a place you might want to check out.
It's called Thrive Market.
If you're overhauling your diet, what you keep in your home, research is showing the types of food
you have available are one of the most important things you can do.
So Thrive Market has made it easy for me when I lost 100 lb, they made it so that it's easy for me
to keep that weight off because I have good choices in my home.
Yes, I know how to grocery shop well, but Thrive Market does a lot of legwork for me.
So they sort by diet type, they vet ingredients.
So anything you order from them, you can trust doesn't have nasty preservatives, doesn't have nasty
ingredients.
you can sort by like low carb or by low sugar.
And then it gets delivered to your doorstep.
Not to mention, if you're Pigeon Patties, that is a 30% off discount link off your entire first
grocery order.
So you order from Thrive Market, you save 30% off your whole grocery cart, plus you get a free $60
gift.
So that link is down below, it's in the top line of the description.
Highly recommend you check them out if you're looking for an affordable way to get better for you
options in your home.
So that link's down below.
So back to this calcium thing.
We know that calcium's good for bone health, but its role in your pancreas is arguably even more
critical for your minute-to-minute energy levels.
We don't think about it.
You see, insulin is created and stored inside your pancreas in these little bubbles that are called
vesicles.
But it doesn't leak out of these vesicles.
Okay, it doesn't just leak out.
It needs a powerful, specific trigger to tell it to release.
And calcium is sort of that electrical trigger.
So there was a study in the journal Cell Calcium that used really advanced imaging to watch this
happen in real time.
Here's the simple version of what they saw with the study.
After you eat, glucose enters your pancreatic cells.
The energy inside that cell rises, which changes the cell's electrical charge.
This electrical change throws open special doors on the cell that are designed to let calcium and
only calcium in.
So calcium then rushes into the cell.
And this rapid influx of calcium is the physical go signal that it needs.
It's the spark that literally pushes the insulin out of the bloodstream to do its job.
It doesn't just leak out, it catapults out.
So think of it like a spark plug in your car's engine.
You can have a full tank of gas, like plenty of insulin stored up, but if your spark plug is dirty
or it's weak, the engine is going to sputter, it's going to run inefficiently, the engine's going to
flood, it's not going to work well.
So providing your body with adequate dietary calcium, not a calcium supplement, is like ensuring
that you have a clean, strong spark every single time.
So it allows for a crisp, efficient release of insulin so your pancreas doesn't have to overwork
itself and burn itself out, which is what happens with metabolically inefficient people or people
that are dealing with mitochondrial deficiency where it's just not working well.
Here is the trick.
Instead of just plain water, make a habit of sipping on a high calcium mineral water every once in a
while.
Or just sip on like one or two bottles of just good quality mineral water over the course of a day.
Brands like San Pellegrino or Gerolsteiner or even Evian has some of these.
I always kind of think about that Evian joke.
Wasn't it from the movie where they say, "Go drink a bottle of yourself, Evian"?
But also Evian spelled backwards is naive because it's so expensive.
But either way, they have some good mineral water.
Just check the label for the calcium content.
That's what you want to look at.
A lot of times when they're making a mineral like a bubbly water, they're adding calcium to it.
It's a simple way to do it.
You can also just have a little bit of like kefir, you can have a little bit of Greek yogurt, a
little cottage cheese.
Believe it or not, a lot of us do become deficient in calcium.
I just don't want you to load up on like 500 mg of a calcium supplement because that comes with its
own negative attributes, right?
It also cancels out magnesium.
So if you get some extra calcium in through your diet, just make sure you're adding your magnesium
in at night because if you combine calcium and magnesium, they actually compete for one another and
can cancel each other out.
So load your magnesium supplementation to the evening and keep your calcium coming in from the diet,
not from calcium supplements.
But the third thing I wanted to talk about.
What if there was actually a specific time that you could eat carbs and almost guarantee that
they'll be used to build muscle and not stored as fat?
This brings us to the final point that I want to talk about.
That's using carbs intra-workout.
This connects directly back to that emergency backdoor pathway that we talked about in the
beginning, but it also teaches us a way to have carbs, have our cake and eat it, too.
So when you're actively training a muscle, like you're lifting weights, you're doing heavy duty
cardio, whatever it is, you're creating the ultimate opportunity for insulin independent glucose
uptake.
The muscles that you are working are contracting over and over and over again.
So their AMPK fuel gauge is screaming for energy.
So this is the perfect time.
Those GLUT4 doors are not just unlocked, they've been ripped off their hinges and your working
muscles are a literal like they're just sucking the glucose in.
So any simple carbohydrates that you consume during this window don't even have a chance to float
around in your bloodstream.
They're immediately sucked up by the working muscles and they're used for fuel on the spot and to
replenish glycogen that you just burned up.
It's the one time where carbs have a direct, non-stop ticket to their destination without having to
wait for the insulin shuttle bus and you're not having to spike your insulin and potentially turn on
fat storage.
So here's the trick.
For workouts that are lasting longer than an hour or for any particular intense sessions, you could
add a little bit of fast acting carbohydrate to the water.
Like you could literally add like cyclic dextrin, you could also sip on watermelon juice like I've
done because then you get some citrulline as well.
You get a little bit of a pump.
This will improve the performance but realistically, it's just kind of helping the recovery process
start.
But it's making sure that you can kind of train the mitochondria to use glucose again and use
carbohydrates so it doesn't lose the ability to without having to have insulin present.
That's the problem.
As believe it or not, our cells get worse at using glucose because they're not using it efficiently
because the insulin dynamics are all messed up.
So by having carbohydrates when we don't need insulin, the mitochondria gets to actually use glucose
without insulin.
So the mitochondria portion, the actual powerhouse, is like, "Oh, cool.
I can use this fuel again." And it actually gets better at using carbs so then when you do have
carbs, they're partitioned properly and the body can use them again.
So you're actually training the cells to use carbs properly.
So let's sort of recap the game plan.
Immediately after your meals, you're going to do two or three sets of intense body weight movement.
Okay, so squats, push-ups, lunges to activate AMPK and create that glucose sink in your muscles.
Throughout the day or just a little bit before meals, sip on high calcium mineral water or kefir or
yogurt or drinkable yogurt, whatever.
Something that has low sugar to provide a spark for that efficient insulin release.
And then during long or even just intense workouts, sip on some watermelon juice, have your
carbohydrates then so that your cells learn how to use it.
Now, I did a video here that breaks down how to use apple cider vinegar to aid in carbohydrate
metabolism as well.
This is a fascinating video that goes deep into the mechanisms but teaches you really some of the
things that people don't talk about on YouTube with apple cider vinegar.
So check that video out here.
And as always, keep it locked in here on my channel.
I'll see you tomorrow.
