Why are people defending seed oils?
And what is the real problem with seed oils in a human diet?
>> Seed oils make your tissues more vulnerable to damage.
One of the problems that has caused a lot of controversy, I think the reason there's so much back
and forth over this is that it takes the right type of study to see seed oils making your tissues
more vulnerable to damage because you need the enough time for the damage to play out and you need
people who are more vulnerable to the damage.
And we've been talking a lot today about how aging is increasing that tissue damage.
Like everything is your repair capacity goes down as you grow older because your mitochondrial
energy production is going down.
And one of the things you want to look at is what do seed oils do to you by the time you're 75?
And you don't just want to look at what do seed oils do to you when you're 25 because you might not
be seeing the capacity for the increased vulnerability of tissue damage.
Another thing is the trials have to be long enough both because it takes time to see the process of
tissue damage uh play out and also because we know from long trials of seed oils that short trials
are useless.
And there are a lot of the people who are talking the loudest in defense of seed oils are looking at
trials that last seven weeks long or 12 weeks long and they're ignoring trials that were done in the
' 50s,60s and 70s that were 5 to 8 years long.
And I'm just like, you know, by all means analyze the shorter trials, but do it in the light of what
we know from the longer trials.
And the most important of the longer trials was the LA Veterans Administration Hospital study.
They randomized people to seed oils or traditional fats.
And the in the first two years, you had a little bit of a heart disease benefit, but then it wore
off over time.
And so the heart heart disease mortality basically by the end of the trial was just kind of flat.
But the cancer was the same for the first two years.
But then at the 2 to 5 year mark, it started diverging and you see, oh, looks like there's something
there.
The 5 to sevenyear mark, it's, you know, traditional fats down here and this gap starts widening
where seed oils are up here.
And then by the end of the study, total mortality was kind of flat the whole time, but it just
started to diverge at the end of the study to favor seed oils causing more death.
And this study was the longest and it was also the one where the the only trial ever done with seed
oils where the people the mean age was 65.
So the people were older than in every other trial.
And one of the important things about being old is that's that's what makes you able to get cancer.
There are some childhood cancers but in general people start getting cancer when they live long
enough to not die of heart disease first.
So doing the trial in older people for longer is what allowed you to see that the seed oils seem to
be able to cause cancer.
And what the author's conclusion was was that because the total mortality was just starting to
diverge at the 8-year mark and because they had a plausible reason for it that the cancer was
exploding.
They said we have ultimately left the question of whether these oils are toxic unresolved and the
one thing that we need is instead of the previous goal of the trials being 5 years long that the
trials be done well in excess of 8 years.
Okay.
So scientists think that they're just like looking at the older and they're saying oh what what was
the gap in the knowledge that we need to solve next?
Well, I'm telling you, they concluded in 1969 that the gap in the knowledge was we need a trial
that's long a lot longer than 8 years.
And what did we get?
7 to 12week trials.
Now, we also know why seed oils would take a while to have such negative effects.
Because it actually takes you 4 years just for your tissues to start looking like the seed oil
you're eating.
Like if you switch from butter and olive oil today and you go on corn oil, it's going to take four
years for your tissues to fully look like the corn oil.
And then once that happens, you've got secondary effects.
So you start getting your vitamin E levels depleted much faster.
But it takes a while for the vitamin E levels to go down in order for other um effects, other
results of that like the the increased vulnerability to the uh tissues being destroyed.
All that stuff is like you you're you're not even starting to see it until five, six years go by.
Um, [snorts] and so that I think that's the big reason that there's so much controversy is that for
whatever reason, there are some people who just don't want to look at the at the older trials that
were very long and they're spending all their time looking at these very short-term trials.
