There's a two-faced hormone produced in our body that is not cortisol that is a huge driver for
insulin resistance and gaining visceral belly fat.
It could be the reason why sometimes when you work out you feel good, but other times when you
exercise you feel like it downright breaks you.
This is a real thing and it could explain why sometimes exercise backfires and why people start to
gain weight and develop more insulin resistance.
Not saying exercise is bad, but this compound that our body produces explains a lot.
It's called FGF21.
And in this video, we're going to break down exactly how FGF21 works.
We'll talk about the mechanisms and I've got a cool firefighter analogy that really puts things into
perspective.
Then, we're going to talk about a way that you can exercise that capitalizes on using FGF21 in a
good way, not a bad way.
And you're going to like it because it uses a lot less of your time.
And third and finally, we're going to talk about how you can organize your life with a simple mantra
and a simple explanation that makes everything make sense, ranging from your diet, your
supplementation, your sauna usage, your exercise, and even how you literally live your life.
So, this FGF21 hormone is actually the reason that exercise and fasting work for us.
It's literally the cellular stress response mechanism.
So, when you think about how cortisol is, cortisol is driven by the adrenals, right?
It's the stress response in general.
Okay, so cortisol can go any way.
It can go good, it can go bad, it can make you store fat, it can make you burn fat.
But, I want you to think of cortisol as like overarching theme and I want you to think of this FGF21
as something that is more specific.
So, when we exercise, we increase FGF21.
When we fast and we stress ourselves, we increase FGF21.
Okay, and I want you to think of it like a firefighter.
This FGF21 says there's a stress response, let's go ahead, let's put out this fire.
Okay, little workout here, let's put out this fire.
But, But to a 2018 study published in nature, what we found is that when the stress response is
constant in people that are metabolically unhealthy or dealing with mitochondrial dysfunction, what
ends up happening is the firefighters get tired.
And you actually start to develop what is called FGF21 resistance.
So you actually start having a lack of response to the stress.
Meaning the stress just amplifies and amplifies and amplifies.
So if cortisol is the master sort of stress response and FGF21 is the cellular stress messenger, you
just eradicated the messenger.
So now all you have is overarching cortisol stress without the messenger actually going to put out
the fire and deal with the stress as it should be.
So this FGF21 resistance makes you feel like everything that you're doing is falling flat on its
face.
You're exercising and you're just getting more run down.
You're dieting and you're just feeling fatigued and run down.
You even go to a cold plunge and it's like you get sick.
You're just you can't win.
You can't catch a break.
But it's because and this evidence in the study in nature metabolism shows us FGF21 is designed to
be in short bursts.
So what does that look like with exercise?
Now we get into the second part of this video.
The good news is it's going to require a lot less of your time.
What we need to start doing is when we are metabolically dysfunctional, what is some of the first
thing that we do when we go sign up with a personal trainer or something?
We start exercising a lot.
We go from zero to 60.
This FGF21 resistance will come on fast, okay?
And if there is a constant chronic stress, you are going to battle this.
Especially if you're a typical human and you are dealing with a real stress in your life from your
family, from your work, from your neighbor's dog.
All these things add up and it's real.
Not to mention all kinds of different illnesses and all things that can plague us, right?
It's a problem.
So when we start throwing a 60-minute workout into the mix, you could see how this could be
problematic.
So there's two important things.
Number one, I want you to think pulse, not pressure.
The interesting thing about FGF21 21, it responds fast.
Cortisol responds all the time, goes crazy.
Not really on off as much as FGF 21.
FGF 21 can actually work in our favor if we treat our workouts in a pulsatile fashion.
You're going to love me for saying this, but 15-20 minute workouts with higher intensity,
capitalizing on recovery.
15 years ago, when I was 300 lb, that's how I needed to work out.
Okay, so painting a picture now, I'm healthy, I'm metabolically conditioned.
Yeah, my workouts can be longer, maybe more like 45 minutes, but I'm still capitalizing on recovery.
We have to treat our workouts appropriately for where we are.
Otherwise, it's just too much stress, too.
Trust me, I love working out, and I would love all of you to be able to work out 2 hours with me,
but that's just not going to happen.
So, how does this look when it comes down to timing with our intervals?
You need to listen to your body on this.
Have you ever had those situations where you work out and you literally feel like you go backwards?
And I don't mean like you're not making progress, but I mean like I gained weight when I started
working out.
If you start having increases in water retention and you gain weight when you increase your workout
intensity, and I don't mean muscle weight, I mean like you worked out today hard, the next few days
you weigh 3, 4, 5 lb more, that is a traditional inflammatory response that you can see manifest in
that.
And we see it as athletes, too.
When you're very lean and you increase your workout intensity, you start retaining water.
How do we combat this?
We reduce our intensity and we watch that water fluctuation and we watch that weight fluctuation.
Now, another thing that you want to pay attention to is hydration with this.
Our body, when it comes down to insulin resistance, metabolic dysfunction, and all of these things
that we're talking about, including visceral belly fat.
This is a highly regulated mineralocorticoid, glucocorticoid response within the body.
So, hydration, but also, get this, when you fast or when you go periods of low carb, this is going
to sound wild, you train your body to utilize fats better.
And when you utilize fats better, you make water from your fat, literally.
When you break down your fat, it gets ultimately broken down into hydrogens.
Those hydrogens combine with oxygen that we breathe.
If we go back to even elementary school, what are hydrogen and oxygen going to make?
They're going to make water.
It makes molecular water, which then actually helps our mitochondria function better, believe it or
not.
It's clean water that our mitochondria can use, okay?
So, adequate hydration, but also adequate metabolic hydration by training your body to use fats
better.
So, occasionally keeping your insulin levels low by going low carb for a day or two or longer and
the occasional fast.
And we'll talk about more dietary and supplement strategies in just a moment.
I put a link down below for element electrolytes as well, okay?
If you're increasing your amount of fasting or decreasing your carbohydrates, when insulin levels
are lower, you excrete more water.
This is good, but it could also leave you dehydrated if you're not used to it.
So, it's not only important to drink water, it's also important to truly hydrate with minerals, too.
So, that link down below gets you a free sample variety pack with any purchase of element
electrolytes.
It's a really cool wicked deal for people that watch my channel.
So, again, it's a free sample variety pack of their main flavors with any purchase.
So, I recommend that cuz it's got an adequate minerals that can help you get truly hydrated.
So, link down below underneath this video.
Now, the third part of this video.
How do we put this into a framework, a mantra that we can live by that truly applies to everything?
I often say when I'm on stage speaking, I talk about this a lot, we want to live our life like we do
interval training.
We're not designed to be full force, pedal to the metal all the time with every stressor in our
life, but the modern day of living leaves us feeling like that.
And it truly is happening because we have a lot going on.
But, when you take a step back and you realize, "Okay, I can throttle my stressors." Think of
fasting, for example.
Fasting is a stressor.
And if you do too much fasting, it counteracts everything, too.
You have a negative effect.
Why?
Because you increase FGF21 resistance, once again.
It's a stressor.
It's all a balance.
So, it's like with fasting, I tell people you need to go fast and feast.
It should be a stressor to the body and then a full recovery.
If you are training hard, exercising more, you're sick, anything like that, anything that's taxing
your body, fasting should be less frequent, intense, and frequent.
You go through periods of time when you restrict calories, eventually you end up with leptin
resistance or you end up with you know, all kinds of different issues that come from just
restricting calories including FGF21 resistance.
Periods of time where you restrict calories, periods of time where you don't.
Treat your life like intervals.
You would exercise with maybe 1 minute on, 1 minute off.
The goal is maintaining intensity with everything.
How can you expect yourself to give an hour of your all in a workout when you're doing that every
day and you already have stress going on in your life?
You tell me.
Is it possible?
Where are you getting the energy from?
Okay, you're going to break yourself down.
I would rather you go 20 minutes and push the intensity.
I would also rather you go 2 days a week of aggressive fasting and push the intensity with that.
I would also rather you go things like sauna or cold plunge infrequently but go all the way.
This way you trigger the whole fire department to come over, put out this fire, adapt, and then go
back and recharge.
And I promise you we will see an improvement because cortisol levels will come down and everything
will start to feel more harmonious.
Didn't the weight start to pile on when you got more stressed out?
Didn't the cortisol start to increase and the sleep go to garbage when you had kids and you had more
stress in your life?
When you started having big adult kid problems?
So we have to look at this how we modulate things.
We're not full of infinite energy.
It has to come from somewhere.
There's a lot going on with insulin resistance though.
A lot of different pieces.
And I did a really cool video here that breaks down some of the new discoveries with insulin
resistance.
Okay, so seven new discoveries that sort of change how you might look at insulin resistance.
So that video is right here.
As always, keep it locked in here on my channel.
Peace out.
See you later.
