You got beef with my buffalo, homie?
All right.
What I'm going to talk about in this video is the comparison of grass-fed beef to buffalo.
But before we start talking about that comparison, I have to break down conventionally raised beef
in comparison to grass-fed beef.
Why?
Because the fatty acid profile is completely different.
And it simply has to do with how the cow is raised.
So, when we look at conventionally raised beef, meaning most of the beef that you're going to see in
the grocery store, the cow is born, it's raised out on the pasture for a little bit, and then it's
brought into a facility where it's just fed a bunch of grain like corn and soy.
Very controlled diet that is lacking a lot of nutrition.
Now, this ends up being a very bad thing, and I'll explain that later on when I start breaking down
the fatty acid composition, but essentially, they're fed a lot of antibiotics.
They're given a lot of drugs.
They're given a lot of inoculations just to keep them healthy because they're in closed confines.
They're actually eating food that isn't nutritious and they need to have their immune system
supported artificially.
So, there's a lot of negative things there.
But then when we look at grass-fed, okay, grass-fed, they're just living off the grass, okay?
They're eating off of a pasture.
And a lot of times they're never touching grain at all.
So even when it finally comes time to go to slaughter, they've just been eating grass the whole
time.
Now, how does this play a part in the fatty acid composition?
A lot of it has to do with the omega6 and omega-3 profile.
You see, soy and grain is super super high in what's called omega6, and that's going to translate
directly into the meat that we consume.
You see, conventionally raised cows are going to end up containing a lot more residue of the
antibiotics, of the medications, and even of the poor nutritional food that they're given when it
comes down to being slaughtered.
So, how does a grass-fed cow do a lot better?
Well, for one, it doesn't have the high omega-6 profile, but it also has a lot of what is called
CLA, conjugated linoleic acid.
What CLA is is a very critical fatty acid that allows us to utilize fat a little bit more
efficiently for fuel.
Now, there was one study that was even done by the Journal of Clinical Nutrition that found that
those that took CLA, conjugated linoleic acid, on average lost about a quarter pound per week,
essentially losing a pound per month just by adding CLA into their diet compared to a control that
ate the exact same thing, but did not add the CLA.
So, you can see the benefit right then and there metabolically of consuming grass-fed beef versus
conventionally raised beef.
In addition to having a less ideal fatty acid composition, conventionally raised beef also has a lot
of high bacteria levels.
Simply put, the grain is sort of a cesspool of bacteria.
And also, these cattle are raised in an environment that's very unsanitary because they're close
together.
They're not free roaming.
They're not just out on pasture.
They're in close confined areas.
They're making it much easier for them to contract illness, which means when it comes down to the
consumer's plate, more instances of E.coli coli and things like that.
So, we definitely want to be cognizant of that.
So, even though grass-fed beef technically contains a little bit less fat because it's leaner, it
has two to six times the amount of healthy fats as conventional beef, meaning it has the omega-3
versus the omega 6.
It doesn't have the high levels of antibiotics and veterinary medications, but it's also just
flatout more ethical, too.
Now, let's break it down to the comparison with buffalo.
So, you've isolated that grass-fed beef is better than conventional.
So, now let's move on.
Okay, so buffalo is significantly leaner than grass-fed beef.
Very, very true.
However, one thing that is absolutely amazing about buffalo meat is that the USDA has guidelines
that they cannot have medications administered to them like traditional cows can.
Meaning, they're not going through the same hormone treatment.
They're not going through the same antibiotic treatment.
And generally speaking, they are almost always grass-fed.
So, you're much more likely to find a high quality buffalo meat than you even are a high quality
grass-fed beef meat.
Because even if it's grass-fed, it doesn't necessarily mean that it's organic.
Either way, whether it's coming down to beef or buffalo, there's one thing you need to be extremely
extremely cognizant of, and that's the fact that sometimes, even when the label says that it's
grass-fed, they've still been grainfished.
So, when you're buying buffalo meat, it's super important that you find one that is 100% grass-fed
because oftent times they'll trick you with the label.
They'll say it's grass-fed.
Then the last 6 months, they'll switch them over to grain to try to add a lot of weight to the
buffalo.
This way, they're going to get better market price.
So, you have to make sure that you pay very close attention to that.
I want to give you a quick breakdown of some of the differences in calories, protein, and fat from
beef to buffalo just so you have a snapshot glance.
A 4 oz serving of beef filetmenan is about 180 calories.
Whereas a 4 oz serving of bison filetmenan is about 120 calories.
When it comes to protein, a 3 oz serving of beef top sirloin is about 23 gram.
Whereas a 3 oz serving of bison top sirloin is about 24 g.
When it comes to fat, an 8 oz serving of beef ribeye is about 50 gram of fat and 20 gram of
saturated fat.
Whereas that same 8 oz serving of a bison ribeye has 22 grams of fat and 10 gram of saturated fat.
So you can see it's significantly less fat overall and a better ratio of those mono and
polyunsaturated fats versus saturated fats.
So what's the answer?
Which one is better?
It's all going to come down to what you need as an individual.
Buffalo is going to be significantly leaner.
It's got a higher level of trace minerals generally because there's not the adulteration of adding
other antibiotics that can break down minerals.
you're going to have higher levels of things like selenium, which is really good for your thyroid.
But beef, you're going to have a little bit more fat content.
So, if you're doing something like a ketogenic diet, you might want to go for the grass-fed beef
because you're going to simply get more fat.
But when it comes down to bison, it's really, really good for a general overall healthy lifestyle.
That's going to be a lower fat, lower cholesterol approach.
So, again, it comes down to what your purpose is when it comes to it.
But one thing is for certain, stay away from that conventionally raised beef that's loaded with the
soy, loaded with the corn, and is certain to throw off your omega 6 to omega-3 profiles, which we
all know can cause an increase in inflammation and leave you feeling like a load of garbage.
As always, keep it locked in here to cut through the fluff, cut through the noise, and figure out
what's going to work best for your family, best for your business, and best for you in the kitchen.
I'll see you soon.
