Do you have problems with your blood sugar?
If so you need to watch this video because part of the solution could be as simple as glycine.
Hi I'm Dr.
Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com.
And you are watching Chris Masterjohn Lite where where the name the game is "Details?
Shmeetails.
Just tell me what works!" And what can work for blood sugar is glycine.
Three to five grams of glycine taken before a meal has been shown to blunt the blood glucose
response to that meal.
In other words you eat a meal that contains carbohydrate, your blood sugar remains more stable after
that meal when you get the glycine.
In type 2 diabetes 15 grams of glycine taken every day has been shown to improve the metabolic
health of the individuals with diabetes.
Fifteen grams of glycine a day is what you would get if you were eating 3 meals a day and taking 5
grams of glycine before each meal.
Now this is not a substitute for medical treatment of diabetes, you should always discuss what
you're doing for it with your doctor, but it is a safe nutritional supplement that may be a benefit
and should definitely be something you consider if you have problems with your blood sugar.
I learned about this effect of glycine from Alex Leaf of Examine.com when Alex and I along with
Vladimir Heiskanen recorded a podcast on glycine together.
You can see that podcast when it comes out at chrismasterjohnphd.com/glycine.
So keep a lookout for it.
Now to get 3 to 5 grams of glycine you're looking at getting 1 to a little less than 2 maybe 1 and
2/3 servings of hydrolyzed collagen.
You can also take a pure glycine supplement and some people have asked me about bone broth; bone
broth is a great source of glycine, but it's highly variable depending on the conditions and how
rich in protein it is.
Kettle and Fire bone broth, which I do use in my cooking, says that it has 10 grams of protein per
serving and so it should have a little over 3 grams of glycine, but I've also seen other broths
analyzed where you needed to take litres of it to get three grams of glycine.
So if you're making your own I don't recommend assuming that there's any particular amount in it.
Now I think it's great to make your own bone broth and I think it's great to use Kettle and Fire,
but if you're trying to get 3 to 5 grams of glycine per meal it's probably going to be really
expensive to try to use a high-quality bone broth at every single meal and so a hydrolyzed collagen
or glycine supplement is probably more practical.
Just test what you digest the best, what seems to provide you with the most benefit, use a brand
that you trust with manufacturing processes that you trust and pick something that is most
affordable to you.
All right I hope you found this useful.
Signing off, this is Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com You've been watching Chris
Masterjohn Lite, and I will see you in the next episode.
