Did you know that pairing a meat with a vegetable isn't just about having a balanced diet?
It could literally be saving your life.
I'm going to explain in this video why grilling isn't always the healthiest option.
But hear me out through this entire video because I'm going to explain some ways around it.
You see, what ends up happening when you cook meats is you always have these byproducts.
You see, meats, of course, are made up of proteins and proteins break down at high heat.
And there are a couple particular things that happen when we grill foods at a very high temperature.
I'm going to talk about grilling first, especially because it's relevant with summertime here.
When you cook a meat at a high temperature, you have a byproduct of something known as heterosyclic
amines.
These heterosyclic amines are also known as HCAs.
And I'm going to explain in just a minute what they do inside your body.
And they're simply a result of that char.
So every time you cook a meat and you get that nice char that you want on it, well that same char
that tastes so good and gives it that charred flavor is the same char that could be holding you back
in a lot of ways.
Now, additionally, there's something else called polyyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.
And that's a result of the smoke of cooking a meat at a very high temperature.
I'm going to explain that in just a second as well.
So let me explain why these heterosyclic amines, these HCAs are so bad and why grilling your meats
at a very high temperature is so dangerous.
HCAs affect our DNA, okay?
They affect our genes simply because they're what is known as a mutagenic compound.
HCAs literally restructure some of the DNA in our bodies.
Why does this seem so bad?
Well, think about cancer for a second.
Cancer is the structure that is changing in your body.
You have a tumor that is growing because you have a genetic deficiency or you have something that is
skewed, something that is slightly off in your body.
So when you think about something changing like that, it's easy for a tumor to start to grow.
In fact, HCAs have been linked to lymph, breast, prostate, and colon cancers.
It's a pretty serious accusation, but it's absolutely true.
Now, let's talk about PH for a second.
That polyyclic aromatic hydrocarbon, that is literally a byproduct of the smoke.
So, when you cook a meat and the fat drips out of the meat into the hot burner or into the hot
grill, it's going to create smoke.
Well, that smoke creates something that's known as PH, which is literally just a byproduct of the
amino acids and also the creatine that's in the meat.
Yeah, crazy, right?
The creatine, the thing that we all talk about as being something that can help with muscular
endurance and muscular strength when reacting with high heat, becomes toxic.
Now, let's talk about how you can avoid some of these things.
And now that I've scared you enough, it's time for me to break it down and teach you how you can
avoid some of these issues.
The simplest solution is to cook at a lower heat.
I think a lot of times, at least in Western culture, we become so impatient that we just want to
cook things fast.
But in reality, if you just spend a little bit more time and cook it slower, you can put yourself in
a much healthier position.
So, here's what I recommend when it comes to grilling.
Turn it up to high heat and get the grill really, really hot.
Then, turn the heat down by the time you put the meat on it.
That way, the grill is actually hot.
You still get the grill marks that you like.
You still get that flavor, but you don't get the overzealous amount of char that's on it.
Additionally, you can sear meat first by putting it on for a few seconds on each side.
That way, you're locking in the fats.
Then, you turn down the heat, and that's going to seal the fats in so that they don't drip onto the
hot burner and create those polyylic aromatic hydrocarbons that are so bad.
Simple as that.
Now, another simple thing that you can do if you're cooking on a basic charcoal grill is raise the
grill height above the burner that much more.
So raise it off the charcoals.
Raise it up off the embers a little bit more so that that smoke has a little bit more time to get
some more oxygen so it's not as concentrated by the time it hits the meat.
But now let's talk a little bit about some other options for cooking.
Okay, obviously things like oven roasting, things like stewing are going to be the best because
they're usually at low temperature.
So throw that food in a crock pot whenever you can.
But some of us like to pan sear our food and we have to factor in that you still have some char even
when you pan sear food.
But I'm going to drop some science on you and how it makes sense when we're talking about pan
searing and the relationship with heterocylic amines.
Research has recently shown that simply by reducing the heat when you're pan searing from high down
to medium reduces the heterosyclic amines by three times.
Okay, now here's the thing.
Reducing the heat from high to medium only adds on average 1 and 12 to 2 minutes of cooking time.
Who doesn't have 1 and 12 to 2 minutes to not get cancer later on down the road?
Well, now that's enough for me to justify cooking on a pan at a lower temperature.
But let me give you a couple other ways that might reduce those HCAs and those phahes in your meat.
And they're a little bit interesting.
The Journal of Agriculture and Food Chemistry found that by soaking red meat, by marinating red meat
in either red wine or beer, significantly reduced the amount of HCAs that were formed when grilling.
Now, why is this the case?
It likely has to do with antioxidant activity.
Okay, red wine has a high amount of what is known as resveratrol, which may counteract some of the
mutagenic compounds that occur with HCAs.
Now, there's not a lot of science to back up why this happens, but still pretty darn intriguing.
And then there was an additional study that was done by Kansas State University that took a look
even further and they looked at rubbing rosemary on meats before grilling.
Believe it or not, rubbing rosemary on meats before grilling reduced HCAs by 90%.
90% just by using the power of an herb.
Pretty darn amazing.
Well, when we look at it like that, we start to inch towards this thought process that maybe having
some antioxidants like some veggies with our meats might really counteract some of the damaging
effects of the meats in the first place.
So, it's time to reference one more study.
This one study took a look at men that consumed 2 and 1/2 cups of Brussels sprouts every day for
about 3 weeks.
Okay.
What they found is by consuming this cruciferous vegetable, they had a reduction in DNA damage that
was extremely significant.
Now, what it has to do with is something known as sulfurates.
Okay, those sulfurates are components of cruciferous vegetables that reduce DNA damage within the
body.
The reasoning behind it is still kind of unknown.
So, there you have it.
You have the simple reasons that you should be pairing your veggies with meats, but also why you
might want to start cooking at a little bit of a lower temperature.
And you might be wondering, well, I'm perfectly healthy.
I'm young.
I don't need to worry about cancer.
Well, let me tell you this, being totally blunt, nothing is going to slow down your progress more
than getting cancer.
And if something is going to give you cancer, it's usually an indicator that it's doing some other
things in your body as well.
Because honestly, we want our energy to be focused on building muscle, on burning fat, not on
growing a tumor.
So, as always, keep it locked in here and make sure you let me know what videos you want to see in
the next series so that I can make sure that I bring you the amazing content that you want.
I will see you in the next video.
