They said that fasting would break down our muscle.
They said that fasting would slow down our metabolism.
They said that fasting would make it so that the joints don't repair as well because recovery would
go down.
But the comprehensive studies looking at over 3,000 proteins in the body and what happens over a
multi-day fast kind of say otherwise.
Specifically, when we're talking about connective tissue, imagine fasting being what people kind of
said it was almost.
I don't know, semi miraculous in a way, right?
I don't want to like put the cart before the horse, but imagine fasting helping your body know how
to repair by signaling intrinsic things in our body, biological things that help us repair with cues
that come from, well, I don't know, deep within.
There's newer evidence now suggesting that after 36 hours with no food, you have a major change in
signaling and entire protein structures within the extracellular matrix, the ECM, which affects
what's called collagen turnover.
Now, I'll get into the exact details in just a second.
But here's what we're going to cover in this video.
We're going to talk about what this newer study was and what they looked at, why it's really
important.
Then, we're going to talk about two really important things that need to be debunked because quite
frankly, it's been a little bit wrong and people have been mistaken and misled in the fasting world
a little bit by this.
Then lastly, we're going to talk about how you can amplify what we've learned from these studies and
how you can do things to get more out of your joint health, to get more out of the anti-inflammatory
effects of fasting and get more actual muscle building as well.
Now, something that might help you out if you are fasting, you do need to be paying attention to
your nutrient profile, like what you're actually getting in the way of nutrition.
So, I put a link down below for something called Fi Health.
Fi Health is a day and night multivitamin stack, and they have a very interesting delivery system.
They use these micro beads.
These micro beads are interesting because there are different vitamins in each stack that break down
at different speeds.
So, for example, you don't want calcium and magnesium to absorb at the same time because they cancel
each other out.
You have a couple other scenarios like that with different B vitamins and things that you don't want
to have having a methylating effect while something else is doing something else.
So, you actually want them to time properly.
So, Fi Health puts their money where their mouth is with this and they've created these unique beads
that work that way.
So that link down below is for a special discount for fi health.
If you are fasting, you're obviously not consuming a lot of food.
So getting adequate nutrients through potentially a multivitamin or a delivery system like this
would be very helpful after you break your fast.
So that link is down below.
It's in the top line of the description underneath this video.
This nature metabolism study I've actually talked about in other videos before and I did a deep dive
on it which I'll link out to later.
But essentially, they had people do a 7-day fast.
And over the course of these 7 days, they measured over 3,000 different proteins and what was
happening each day.
We found out that after a couple of days, major changes occur to the ECM.
And I'll explain what that is in a minute because we learned wild, wild things.
Overall, one of the most important things we learned is what happens when you break a fast and how
you should break a fast based on what we're literally seeing in protein changes in the body.
So, let's move into the second piece that I really want to talk about here cuz this is very
important.
They noticed two key things especially after 48 hours and especially after 72 hours and then after
that it sort of plateaued.
The two things that happened muscle preservation actually kicked in which is frustrating because I
feel like one of the reasons like Peter Aia had even talked about fasting being no longer good for
him was because he thought he was losing too much muscle.
In reality like it seems as though the occasional longerterm fast barely breaks down muscle at all.
In fact, they looked at nitrogen excretion and they saw that there was barely any muscle protein
breakdown.
And this was even after a 7-day fast.
So they found that there were some changes in ura excretion.
There were, you know, a little bit of nitrogen excretion, but nothing crazy.
And they saw that there were markers of muscle protein breakdown that actually went down after 48
hours.
In some ways, shorter fasts could be slightly more catabolic, but nothing to worry about.
I don't think it's that extreme.
Point is, I don't think we need to worry about it unless it's becoming a very chronic thing that
we're just fasting and then chronically undereating after we fast.
The thing is we're learning here is that this isn't just about calories anymore.
There are signaling devices happening.
There are signaling proteins.
There are genetic changes that are occurring.
In a second, I'm going to explain how you actually want to break a fast and how you want to eat for
the following 2 or 3 days after fasting to make sure that you retain the benefits of fasting because
there are some ways that you can absolutely mess it up.
So, we'll get to that in a second.
But the most important thing was what I alluded to even in the title.
There was a change of what's called the ECM.
There was a change in actual structural turnover and collagen turnover and how collagen actually
formed and turned over and signaled in the body indicating that there could be massive connective
tissue changes, massive soft tissue changes that could rival even stem cells in many ways.
And we've heard people talk about fasting for stem cells and a lot of it sounded like gobbledygoot
because it did sound like they were just pulling it out of the side of their mouth.
But when you start seeing the data, you're like maybe what they were feeling is real because we're
starting to get the early data that this could be the case.
So in addition to these major structural proteins being changed, they saw huge increases in proteins
that were associated with wound healing.
Same kind of thing when we have a wound, we use collagen.
Collagen helps us heal that wound.
It's super super important.
So we're also seeing that, okay, this is happening inside the body.
And the reason that this is happening is because the body is having to kick into this survival mode
and reallocate what it needs to repair.
We don't have fuel coming in, so there's less building blocks.
So the body says, "Hey, it's time to start signaling repair of our own tissue.
Let's use this time appropriately.
We're in a little bit of a survival mode." And part of this is in response to a metabolic stress
hormone or protein that's released called FGF-21.
And this happens mainly after 48 hours of fasting.
So you have, you know, glucose goes down, ketones and fats go up, and then you have FGF-21 that
amplifies the stress and it starts saying, "Hey, let's use our onboard fuel and let's do some
things." Just one of the many things that FGF-21 does, but it also accelerates fat utilization.
Now, what I want to share is what happened after they broke a fast because they didn't just measure
them for 7 days during a fast.
They measured days 8 through 14 as well.
And they saw that a lot of things changed.
But the benefits of the fast could be held on to if you were to keep sort of the sugars out of the
equation and the junk food and the inflammatory foods out because what they noticed the most was
that what probably signaled the biggest changes in the body is there was an immune system reset.
It didn't raise or lower the immune system.
It changed what are called chemocines.
like how these chemocines actually go around and target pathogens.
There was also a change in pro-inflammatory cytoines.
These went down.
So pro-inflammatory markers went down.
So one of the amazing things that happens is you have an increase in the immune system surveillance
proteins.
So basically the immune system is better at surveilling and finding potential threats.
So it's getting into the nooks and crannies and it's finding these things that maybe it couldn't
find before because it never had an opportunity to.
So this means you're kickstarting repair.
one of the reasons why maybe there's an increase in this collagen turnover in isolated situations.
So when you break a fast and you inflame yourself with oxidized oils, with poor quality saturated
fats and trans fats, lowquality sugars and refined carbs and all kinds of junk, what's happening is
you're creating an inflammatory response.
It's actually not good to gorge yourself after a long multi-day fast because eating in itself
triggers what's called the postprandial inflammatory response.
Very real, very normal.
It means that anytime you eat, you have inflammation.
So, it might be wise to ease into food slower, not have a bunch of carbohydrates, maybe have
something that's going to keep you satiated for a while.
And the most important thing is eating that way for two or 3 days after a longer fast.
So, if it's 36 hours or more, the days after a fast need to be squeaky clean.
Now, I actually broke down that in a little bit more detail in a video on how to break a fast in
2026.
I think this will help you a lot because it brings new science to light in strategies that I would
use to immediately break a fast and how to eat a couple meals, even days afterwards.
So, I linked out to that video right here.
I recommend you check that one out after this.
The point in this video is to suggest that when you are fasting, you can get many of the benefits of
a multi-day fast in just 36 hours.
But you don't need to be sitting here worrying about breaking down muscle and connective tissue.
Instead, focus on how you eat after your fast to make up for the deficit.
eat good quality food to make up and make sure you don't break down muscle during that period
because the growth hormone release, the muscle preservation, the nitrogen lack of excretion, you are
really in a good place as long as you're not pushing it for days and days and days on end.
As always, keep it locking here on my channel.
I see you.
