Are you getting enough vitamin A?
This is how to monitor your vitamin A status.
Hi.
I'm Dr.
Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com, and this is Chris Masterjohn Lite, where the name of the
game is "Details?
Shmeetails.
Just tell me what works!" Today we're going to talk about monitoring your vitamin A status.
Vitamin A is found in foods in two forms.
The plant form comes in red, orange, yellow, and green vegetables.
The animal form comes in liver and cod liver oil and to a smaller extent in egg yolks and butterfat.
We need the animal form in our bodies, but we're able to convert the plant form into the animal
form, so all of those foods are potential sources of vitamin A.
If we don't get enough vitamin A, we can be subject to a number of signs and symptoms.
The most well-established of these are poor night vision, dry eyes, and hyperkeratosis.
Hyperkeratosis is a buildup of the top layer of the skin, which is normally very, very thin, but can
give a crusty or bumpy appearance when it builds up in more than one layer.
This could appear as crustiness around your hair follicles or as bumps on your skin that could be
mistaken for goose bumps or acne, or they can even occur on the surface of your eye, in which case
you'd need an eye doctor to know about them, but they could be interfering with your vision.
Vitamin A deficiency is also associated with poor immune function, and so if you get sick more
often, then vitamin A could be the problem.
There are other signs and symptoms that are not well-established, but we have basis to think that
they're related, and those include kidney stones, an inability to entrain a proper circadian rhythm
with light, meaning you sleep in darkness, you get morning sunshine, but it's not helping the way
that it should, or various autoimmune disorders, asthma, allergies, food intolerances, problems with
low sex hormones, and in the case of children, delayed puberty.
Now, when you have any of these things, it doesn't necessarily mean that it's vitamin A, but if your
diet is low in red, orange, yellow, and green vegetables, that becomes more plausible.
And there are many of us who aren't good at getting the plant form of vitamin A and need the animal
form of vitamin A from liver or cod liver oil.
In that case, even if you are eating red, orange, yellow, and green vegetables, but you are not
eating liver and cod liver oil, vitamin A deficiency becomes very plausible.
If you're not eating any of those foods, or you're at least not eating the animal foods, and you're
not taking any supplements to make up for that, then vitamin A deficiency becomes really, really
plausible.
If you're not eating any of those foods or supplements, then you're almost guaranteed to have a
vitamin A deficiency.
So, one thing to keep in mind though is that if you have a zinc deficiency, that can hurt your
ability to metabolize vitamin A and can cause a lot of the same problems.
So it can be very helpful to look at the diet, the symptoms, but also verify with number one, blood
work, and number two, response to supplementation, that the problem is actual vitamin A deficiency.
If you're trying to get blood work done, then you could get serum vitamin A tested in one of a
number of ways.
So, LabCorp and Quest both offer serum vitamin A on its own.
If you work with Genova, Genova offers vitamin A on the ION Profile and also on their Fat-Soluble
Vitamin Profile.
In either of those cases, you want to see your serum vitamin A near the middle of the range.
It seems like there's a lot of people who are vulnerable to signs and symptoms of vitamin A
deficiency that do respond to supplementation or improving vitamin A from food when they are within
the normal range but toward the lower end of it.
So if you are below the range, that's a very good sign that you're dealing with vitamin A
deficiency, but even if you're on the lower end of normal, I wouldn't rule it out.
The second part of this is how do you respond to supplementation or to improvement in food intake?
So if you fix this by restoring the foods that were missing from your diet or by adding a vitamin A
supplement, then you—if the symptoms go away, then you have every reason to believe that those
symptoms are a result of the vitamin A deficiency.
That conclusion is even more strong when you see the serum vitamin A move from below the range to in
the range, or from the lower end of normal to the middle of normal, along with resolution of those
signs and symptoms.
It's important not to go crazy overboard with the vitamin A supplementation.
I would limit it in most cases to 10,000 IU a day over the course of weeks or a couple of months
while you're fixing the problems.
If you use more than that, there are definitely some people who need more, but you should tell your
doctor about it.
Make sure you're looking for any signs of vitamin A toxicity, and be careful and only use it for a
few months at a time.
If you're using hundreds of thousands of IU of vitamin A over long periods of time, you start to get
a very significant risk of vitamin A toxicity.
The most common signs of toxicity are generally nausea, vomiting, and headache, but in extremes,
vitamin A toxicity can cause anorexia, blurred vision, scaling skin, alopecia, which is a form of
hair loss, and even organ damage and death.
Is that likely from vitamin A supplements?
Absolutely not, but it's best to keep it well within the range of what will stay away from toxicity,
and that is consistent use of 10,000 IU or less or temporary use of somewhere around 25,000-50,000
IU for a few weeks or a few months with some supervision from a healthcare practitioner.
Given the fact that many of us are not good at deriving vitamin A from plant foods, it may also be
the case that many of us are not good at deriving vitamin A from beta-carotene supplements, which is
the form of vitamin A in plant foods, and these supplements should be retinol, the animal form of
vitamin A, in order to ensure that you're going to get what you need.
More details on testing vitamin A status can be found in my e-book, Signing off, this is Chris
Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com.
You've been watching Chris Masterjohn Lite.
And I will see you in the next episode.
