There's an emotional blunting effect with three grams of this, an actual almost disassociation that
occurs.
Imagine being in a really stressful situation.
You got a stressful email or you're getting in a an argument with your significant other.
Imagine being able to almost step away and detach from that without the physiological fight orflight
response.
Imagine how much better you could handle a situation.
Now, the research from this comes much more from a sleep side of things, but I look at this and say,
"Well, wait a minute.
We could extrapolate that literature and say this could work in our conscious life, not just when
we're trying to go to sleep.
Point blank, I'm talking about glycine.
Like glycine is very fascinating with this.
So, let's talk about how we can use it.
I give you the answer straight up front.
I'm not going to try to dangle the carrot in front of you for a while.
I I just feel like a lot of you are in a hurry.
The answer is glycine.
But please, if you have the time, stick with me so that I can explain it, can kind of share how to
use it, when to time it, and most importantly, how this works.
Because if we know how it works, we can get more out of it.
Also, drop a comment down below.
It helps the algorithm.
And hit that subscribe button if you haven't already.
So, glycine is really unique because on the surface, it looks like it's just an amino acid.
It looks like, okay, this is something that's going to help me maybe sleep a little bit by just
giving me the adequate amounts of aminos that I need.
But no, no, no.
Glycine is very interesting because glycine does two things that are particularly unique that people
don't realize.
It acts as a neurotransmitter and it operates in the brain stem.
It also has impacts within the spinal cord.
can affect all kinds of things.
It's a very unique amino.
Okay.
But the other thing that's particularly interesting about it is that it's a precursor to creatine.
So, this is really fascinating for the brain.
Now, I'm not going down the direction you think I'm going to go.
You think I'm going to talk about brain energetics, don't you?
Talking about creatine.
No, that's a different video for a different day.
What I'm talking about is we have evidence that glycine lowers the cortisol response.
Full disclosure, I recommend taking glycine with creatine because creatine can impact the brain
energetics that allow us to well the best way to put it is not have micro arousals that cause our
brain to shift gears.
So if our energy is low in our brain, creatine provides energy for the brain.
Then what will happen is the brain will actually temporarily go into a fight orflight mode, turn on
the metabolism to try to produce more ATP for the brain and this can even happen during our sleep.
So yes, do combine creatine and glycine, but this video is not too much about creatine.
I put a link down below for the creatine I recommend by the way.
It's just the stick packs that are sweetened with monk fruit and they are one of the few ones that
are using the true legit patented form of creatine called Creapure.
So really good quality stuff and there's no hidden nastiness.
There's no carbohydrates.
There's nothing.
It's just straight up creatine.
It's just straight up easy stick packs that you could micro dose throughout the day with creatine.
And they taste really dang good and there's zero sugar, zero carbs.
Really simple.
It's from Create and that link down below is 50.
Yes, 50% off, half off using that link in the top line of the description for create.
Definitely the only creatine I would recommend if you're someone that is on the go and needs these
stick packs because a lot of them can be phony.
We tested a lot of the gummies and we found that two out of five of the gummies didn't even have any
creatine in them and the other two really just had barely any at all.
So, it's really gnarly.
Anyway, moving on to glycine.
There was a study published in 2024 that was published in sleep medicine reviews and this was pretty
clear and something that we kind of know.
It's basically saying that negative emotions impacted sleep, right?
Well, no duh.
You get in a fight before bed, you're going to probably end up not sleeping well.
But the interesting thing about this study is they found that uh the relationship to the negative
emotion actually was the stronger input for poor sleep.
So essentially, you could have something negative happen, but if you knew how to frame it and
disassociate from it and even detach from it, you could sleep.
So, you know those people, okay, let me say this.
I'm not one of these people, right?
I hold my wife near and dear.
We've been together for 21 years.
When she's upset or I upset her in a way, I take it seriously.
I take it to heart.
And it actually makes it so I can't sleep.
So, like I'm the kind of guy that not anymore.
Fortunately, I've improved this, but I'm the kind of guy that would be like, "No, we're going to
solve this now." Because I can't go to bed without having a resolution because I just once my fight
or flight is on, it's on.
And I just I want a resolution.
I want to solve it.
It's a problem a lot of us face.
Other people can be in a situation like that and they can just like be like, you know what, I'm
going to bed.
We'll deal with this in the morning.
Man, I wish I could do that.
So, a little level of disassociation can help with that and that's where it's seeming like glycine
is really interesting.
There was a study, hear me out on this, in 2022 in aquaculture, this was kind of the initial study
on this.
It was looking at it in uh in fish, believe it or not, random, but it has a place.
And they were finding that well this like glycine absolutely plummeted their cortisol levels.
It's like they're circulating plasma cortisol within minutes of glycine just so then you're like
okay well we're not fish we're humans but it does seem to have a moderate impact on cortisol and the
fight or flight it's very calming so we look more in humans we look at the neurological side of the
neurochemistry we notice that glycine impacts what's called the NMDA receptor so it impacts the NMDA
receptor and it also impacts the supermatic nucleus so in a way one of the reasons that glycine is
so good for sleep by the way the glycine for sleep thing definitely well documented all right so I
haven't really mentioned that I don't want to bore you with the details on that but glycine for
sleep like one and done very effective solid evidence objective really good stuff and also very
strong mechanistic and RCTs like it's good stuff however like understanding how it works tells us a
lot more about how it can work in the daytime so since it impacts the SCN the super kiasmatic
nucleus and again the NMDA receptor it's having this impact of emotional blunting emotional blunting
in a way where you're not completely completely like removed and sociopathic from a situation, but
you're able to detach from your thoughts a little bit better.
Like this could be a great tool for meditation, too, right?
Like it's almost having this mild disassociative effect.
So, by lowering your cortisol and getting yourself out of the fight or flight, you can put yourself
in a spot where you could solve problems better and remove yourself from the actual stress of it.
Now, let's talk just physiologically.
There's all kinds of benefits to being parasympathetic and not in fight or flight.
less visceral fat accumulation, less overall fat accumulation in general, more clear thought, less
hunger, less reactivity, all kinds of metabolic benefits from not being in a stressful state.
So even fat burning in theory could improve a lot more, but definitely less visceral fat storage.
That's closely tied with cortisol.
We have four times the amount of cortisol, gluccocorticoid receptors in our gut than anywhere else
in our body.
So stress definitely can lead to visceral fat accumulation and more belly fat.
So in the case of trying to reduce stress, glycine could be good.
So anyway, the point is we always talk about glycine, taking like three grams before bed to help you
sleep.
Great.
Super beneficial.
What if we started taking one gram of glycine in the morning?
What would happen there?
Well, I started drying it and I noticed that my workouts I was calmer.
Would you want to be calm during a workout?
So you want to be able to have what's called autonomic flexibility.
You want to be able to turn on the fight orflight when you want to, but then you need to be able to
turn it off.
It's like if you're a gazelle and you're getting chased by a lion.
That gazelle can get chased, get back into its field, shake it off, and be back to being calm again.
Do you know many humans that can do that?
Do you know many humans that could get into an altercation, and then just turn it off?
The only people that I know that are sort of like that are the special forces operators that I work
with.
Dr.
Jeffrey Rouse put it well.
It's like you're in a room with an eagle.
They're calm.
and they're cool, but then they'll go boom and back to being calm and cool.
Don't we all wish we could kind of be like that?
Even just our own respective domains.
I feel like there is something there.
That is more how I felt with glycine.
I'm not saying it's a miracle, but I'm saying maybe we should look at this more because the evidence
is there with sleep.
The evidence is there with other models.
It seems like it blunts cortisol and it blunts the emotional response, helps you sleep, helps you be
calmer, might help the metabolism.
I'll see you tomorrow.
