Gary Krieger says "Hi Dr.
Masterjohn.
I will be a single crew for an ultra marathoner running a four day, three night race.
I will have to be available 10 minutes every hour from Friday evening through Monday morning to
assist the runner.
My challenge is I already struggle with insomnia and probably will also struggle with taking quality
catnaps.
Do you have any food or supplement recommendations other than coffee or caffeine to help me keep my
energy focused during the race?" In my personal experience, I find that the best thing that helps me
maintain my brain power after a night of terrible sleep is Think by Four Sigmatic.
It's a blend of mostly lion's mane and it also has some rhodiola and a couple other things in it.
And I mean, I wouldn't dare not have coffee after a terrible night of sleep, but I drink coffee
anyway.
But the thing is coffee.
If I have a terrible night of sleep, I don't feel that coffee compensates for it.
Coffee does wake my mind up, but my mind woken up after a terrible night of sleep is impaired.
And it wakes my body up.
But if I increase the dose of coffee, it may be a boost my brainpower a little bit, but it doesn't
do that much to the impairment.
Whereas I find that Think in...
So they sell it in a...
It's really expensive if you buy their pre-liquified pineapple flavored juice, but for some reason,
I feel like it works a little bit better than the powder.
But I find that the powder works really good.
But I'm using the powder like on my book writing days.
And if I have...
If I do suffer sleep deprivation, I also use it even if I'm not working on my book that day.
And so I go through a lot of it, and therefore I use the more affordable blend.
If you're doing a four day, three night race, I might buy...
I think the liquid one comes with two, excuse me, it comes with six bottles, six single serving
bottles.
And so four days I would buy two boxes of that and use one or two per day.
I think that would be the best thing that you would you use to try to improve your brain power
during that day.
It sounds like if you're on a track, you're not going to have the opportunity to take cold showers,
but I think cold showers can help too.
All right, Gary, I hope that helps.
Oh, Gary had added, "PS, also any diet supplement recommendations for the runner." Well, I mean, I
don't know anything about this ultra marathoner.
I don't know anything about their diet and I imagine that they're putting their diet together around
their training practice already.
So I don't have enough context to add anything from them, but hopefully my sleep deprivation hack
helps you.
Thanks Gary for your question.
