[Music] I want to set something straight here.
You see, there's a big difference between something that increases your blood sugar or has a high
glycemic load versus something that just triggers an insulin response.
A lot of us think that they're unified, but the thing is they're two different processes entirely.
You see, there are foods that we can eat that actually still elicit an insulin response.
So, let me explain how this works because I'm going to talk mainly about whey protein because I have
a lot of people ask me about whey protein all the time.
Is it good to take?
How does it work in the body?
Is it safe?
All these kind of things.
And the thing is, I'm pretty neutral on whey protein.
And it all depends on the quality and it all depends on the kind.
But let me explain how this whole process works when it comes to insulin because that whey protein
that you're consuming does in fact spike your insulin.
And it spikes it quite a bit.
When we consume sugar, it raises our blood sugar naturally.
Now our pancreas as a response to that says I need to create insulin or produce insulin so that the
sugar that is now floating around through the bloodstream can get utilized by the cell and go into
the proper place.
You see for example someone that has diabetes has that insulin resistance where their body really
doesn't produce insulin well.
So when they consume sugar their blood sugar stays high because they have a lot of glucose floating
around.
Well the thing is that insulin is just a response triggered by the glucose.
We can still have an insulin response happen from other foods.
In fact, it happens from amino acids a lot.
Protein in general is one of the most what is called insulinogenic foods that you can possibly eat.
And whey protein is absorbed so fast and the amino acids are released so quickly from that form of
protein that the insulin spike is really, really high because the body still says, "I need to
release insulin so that these amino acids can get shuttled into where they need to go." So, you're
still having the same kind of response.
You're just not loading your blood sugar.
You're not loading your muscle glycogen.
Now, you can take advantage of this because if you're someone that's on like a low carb diet, for
instance, ordinarily, you would need the carbohydrates to shuttle the protein into the muscle cell a
little bit better.
But if you're eating a low carb diet, you finish your workout and you slam a whey protein shake,
well, you're going to get that spike in insulin that is going to allow that protein to get shuttled
into the muscle to recover it that much better.
So, here's a bonus that's actually pretty cool.
In 2005, the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition did a little study.
They found that when you consume a whey protein shake shortly after eating a meal, you could lower
your blood sugar dramatically from that meal.
So, for example, people that are diabetic that eat lunch and have a rise in blood sugar that
ordinarily wouldn't decline because they're not getting the proper amount of insulin response to
that glucose.
if they have a protein shake with whey, it's going to spike their insulin enough that it's going to
help that glucose that is in the bloodstream shuttle in even better.
So, if you're trying to control your blood sugar, having a little bit in the way of protein or a
whey protein shake might not be a bad thing.
The best advice that I can give you when you're shopping around for protein is get one that's high
quality.
Try to find one that's grass-fed and try to get a whey protein isolate so that it's 90% or more
protein and doesn't have a lot of these additives and fillers and other colorings and flavors and
stuff like that.
Well, that's all there is to it.
I just wanted to clear that up and let you know there is a difference between blood glucose and
insulin.
As always, I'll see you in the next video with more tips and tricks on how to get the most out of
your diet to achieve what you want to achieve.
See you soon.
