If you want beautiful skin, great sex, an immune system that will keep you healthy from the
beginning through to the end of cold and flu season, if you want to be able to eat freely and not
worry about your blood sugar spiking, or if you just want to be healthy in general, then you need to
start thinking about zinc.
Hi.
I'm Dr.
Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com and you're watching Chris Masterjohn Lite where the name
of the game is, Details?
Shmeetails.
Just tell me what works!
And today we're going to talk about five rules you need to follow to get enough zinc.
Now, if you don't like to follow the rules, don't worry.
I don't like to follow the rules either.
So just think of these as five principles that you need to be mindful of to get enough zinc.
Rule number one.
There are three zinc superfoods: oysters, red meat, and cheese.
You can get enough zinc for the day if you just eat one or two oysters.
You can get another zinc for the day if you eat one or two servings of red meat, where a serving is
about a quarter pound.
And you can get enough zinc by eating two to three servings of most cheeses, where a serving is a
hundred grams or about 3.5 ounces.
Rule number two.
Beware of phytate.
Phytate is a compound found in whole grains, nuts, seeds, and legumes.
It's something that helps lock in zinc and other minerals to prevent them from getting lost before
it's time for a seed to sprout.
For the seed, this is a way of making sure that when it is time to sprout it's ready to grow a
healthy plant.
But for us when we eat those foods the zinc is very poorly absorbed and so we can get very misled by
looking at a nutritional database and seeing that whole grains, legumes, nuts, and seeds are the
best plant sources of zinc, but no one really knows how much you'll absorb from those foods.
Some scientists estimate that you need fifty percent more zinc when you get it from these foods and
others estimate that you need ten times more.
And eating those foods with your animal zinc superfoods can actually inhibit the absorption of the
zinc from the animal foods.
If your diet is really rich in the zinc superfoods you probably don't need to worry about this, but
if you only eat a little bit of the zinc superfoods, then it might become a problem.
The way you get around that is to eat your zinc-rich foods away from your phytate.
So if you eat a lot of whole grains, nuts, legumes, and seeds, push them towards two or three meals
of the day, any eat your zinc-rich foods at the other meal.
Rule number three.
You're gonna absorb more zinc from your food if you spread it out across the day.
You can only absorb as much zinc in a single meal that will last you about two-thirds of your day.
So what you don't want to do is stock up on oysters on the weekends and assume that that's going to
get you good for zinc through the week.
What you do want to do is have at least one meal a day that's high in zinc and low in phytate and at
least one other meal of the day that's moderately high in zinc and moderately low in phytate.
For example, maybe your breakfast is jam-packed with zinc because you ate two oysters and you didn't
eat any phytate-rich foods.
If at lunch you have another zinc superfood like cheese, you can afford to eat some phytate with it.
Or if your diet is fairly low in phytate, as long as you just eat some animal foods of any kind,
chicken or fish, at your other meals you're probably gonna be all set.
Rule number four.
Some conditions are going to increase your need for zinc.
These include anything related to the growth and repair of tissues.
For example, if you're pregnant you should eat one extra serving of zinc-rich foods per day.
When you're lactating you should eat two extra servings of zinc-rich foods per day.
If you're a bodybuilder and you want to put on ten pounds of muscle mass if you want to go at it
really hard core and put that on in a month you should eat an extra two or three servings of zinc-
rich foods per day.
If you're going to stretch it out over two months you can cut that down in half and if you're going
to stretch it out over a longer period of time it's not going to make as big an impact on your zinc
requirements.
For men, if you ejaculate you need to eat an extra serving of zinc-rich foods each time.
If that's twice a year, it doesn't really matter.
If it's twice a month, it doesn't matter that much either.
If it's twice a day, it means a lot.
If you're recovering from a wound a little extra zinc is probably going to help you heal faster.
If you have an acute episode of diarrhea, while you have the diarrhea you should double your zinc
intake and if you have chronic malabsorption from, for example, Crohn's disease or anything else
that affects the small intestine you may need to double up on your zinc long-term.
Alcoholism and diabetes increase the urinary excretion of zinc and so you may need more in those
conditions as well.
Although if you have any medical condition that may be impacting your zinc requirement, then before
taking action you should discuss these principles with your doctor.
Rule number five is be really smart about your supplementation.
If you're following the other four rules you probably don't need a supplement at all.
But if you're eating a diet where most of your zinc is coming from phytate-rich foods or most of
your meals are very rich in phytate you really don't know how much zinc you're absorbing, and to be
on the safe side it's probably wise to take a zinc supplement.
But most zinc supplements come in doses that are a lot higher than what you need.
If you take 10 or 15 milligrams of zinc per day on an empty stomach before a meal you're going to
absorb sixty to seventy percent of that zinc and that's going to be enough.
If you take that supplement with a meal you don't know how much you're going to absorb and if you
take a lot higher doses on an empty stomach it could make you sick.
More importantly, long-term supplementation with high doses of zinc causes deficiencies of copper
and it may cause deficiencies of other minerals that we haven't studied as closely.
If you're supplementing with zinc on the background of a diet that's high in seafood and organ meats
and unrefined plant foods across a wide spectrum of foods and it's really nutrient-dense, you can
probably just take 15 milligrams of zinc per day and not worry about the copper and other nutrients,
but if you're taking more you should maintain a 10 to 1 ratio of zinc to copper.
And if you're taking more than 20 or 30 milligrams a day, I suggest taking one serving of a trace
mineral complex such as Concentrace in order to make sure that you're not causing a deficiency of
any of these other minerals that we tend not to think too much about and that haven't been studied
as closely.
For a zinc supplement I like Natural Factors zinc citrate, but if you want a simple way to balance
your zinc with your copper I recommend Jarrow Zinc Balance.
All right, I hope you found this useful.
Signing off, this is Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com.
You've been watching Chris Masterjohn Lite, and I will see you in the next video.
