If you care about your brain, your heart, your mood, your energy, your mental performance, or your
happiness then this video is for you.
Hi I'm Dr.
Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com and you are watching Chris Masterjohn Lite, where the
name of the game is, Details?
Shmeetails.
Just tell me what works!
And today we're going to be talking about how to get enough vitamin B12.
This is something we want to be really proactive about because vitamin B12 is critical to all those
functions I described at the beginning of the video and its deficiency can take years or even
decades to manifest, and by the time we know we have it it's possible that we have suffered from
irreversible nervous system degeneration and we definitely want to avoid that.
The absorption of vitamin B12 is unique among nutrients and there's a very unusual rule of thumb
that applies.
And that rule is that you can only absorb enough from a single meal to last you a day.
And the reason that's important is that there are some foods like liver and shellfish that are super
high in vitamin B12 and you could get the sense that you could eat, for example, clams one or two
times a month and never have to eat any other source of vitamin B12 again.
That's not actually true.
However, if you space your meals out four to five hours between each meal you can actually eat
enough vitamin B12 for a day at each of those meals.
So you can stock up three days worth of vitamin B12 in a single day.
All right, so let's get into it.
Suppose you are an omnivore.
Well, the absolute simplest way to get enough vitamin B12 is to eat meat at every meal in an amount
that is about a hundred grams or three-and-a-half ounces or just under a quarter pound.
If you eat liver, you can replace an entire day's worth of meat with 4-8 grams of liver.
Now, I actually recommend eating more liver than that for the other nutrients, and I talked about
that in a previous video, so I'm not gonna talk about it here.
Now, let's say that you have vegetarian tendencies and you don't want to eat meat but you will eat
shellfish.
That could be because you don't want to eat anything with a face, and oysters and clams don't have
faces, or it could be because you belong to a particular religious tradition that has a fasting
practice that mandates that.
For example, many people in the Eastern Orthodox religion will fast from most animal foods during
Lent, but they will still eat shellfish.
If you want to get your vitamin B12 from shellfish, the most effective source is sea clams, also
called surf clams, and these are the clams that are usually sold as frozen chopped clams.
You can eat just four grams of these clams and that will be enough for a whole day's worth of
vitamin B12.
If you want more diversity than that, you should focus on oysters and clams.
Across the species of oysters and clams, on average, you could say that you want to get eight grams
of oysters or clams in a meal and that will be enough meal to last you one full day.
If you're going to do it this way, oysters and clams are so rich in B12 that you could shove all of
your B12-rich meals into two to three days a week but you'd have to eat them at every meal.
Now let's say you're a lacto-ovo vegetarian.
Well, the bad news is that eggs have some vitamin B12 but it's not very absorbable.
So, you have to rely on milk products for your B12 and the simplest way to do that is to drink 3
8-ounce glasses of milk per day or to eat cheese.
Particularly if you're lactose intolerant, you may do best eating cheese that has been aged for at
least 60 days.
If you get it from cheese, you need to eat a hundred gram serving of cheese, which is about three-
and-a-half ounces, a little under a quarter pound, at every meal, just like as if you were getting
your vitamin B12 from meat.
Now let's say you're vegan.
Here you have to tread very carefully because there are a lot of vegan sources of things that look
like vitamin B12 but don't truly behave as vitamin B12 in the body.
And if we look at the rigorous research that's been done, we can say that true vitamin B12 is found
in certain mushrooms like black trumpet, chanterelle, and shiitake, but not most other mushrooms.
And it's found in certain edible algae like nori, which is also called laver, and it's found in
chlorella, although chlorella supplements vary enormously in their vitamin B12 content and shouldn't
be relied upon.
So if you're vegan or you're eating vegan for a period of time, then you can either use black
trumpet, chanterelle, or shiitake mushrooms to substitute as meat by eating a hundred-gram serving
three times a day, or you can do it a much simpler way by treating green or purple laver, also
called green or purple nori, as clams or oysters.
So, four to eight grams of nori in a single meal will last you a full day's worth, and if you wanted
to you could shove all of those meals into two or three days per week as long as you divide the nori
evenly between the three meals of the day.
Vitamin B12 absorption from food decreases with aging, digestive problems, and a number of other
conditions, so it's important to note that these guidelines are for a healthy person with a healthy
digestive system who is designing their diet in a proactive way to maintain good vitamin B12 status
over time.
None of this is to exclude the possibility that you may have to work directly with a health care
professional to look at your vitamin B12 status, and if you have problems absorbing it with food you
may need to supplement.
All right, signing off, this is Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com.
You've been watching Chris Masterjohn Lite and I will see you in the next video.
