What if we could see high cortisol coming before it was ever a major problem?
Maybe you're dealing with the issues of high cortisol now.
Maybe you're waking up at 4:00 a.m.
wired, then you can't fall asleep, everything's all out of whack, you feel stressed all the time,
you're putting on weight.
There was an interesting study that looked at 14 different studies involving fasting and cortisol,
and it teaches us how to look for the red flags that cortisol is becoming problematic.
It also shows us good fasting strategies to make sure we don't end up with high cortisol.
And then at the end of this video, I actually have an actual strategy you could follow that can
reboot cortisol in terms of fasting, an actual fasting method.
So, I'll share that one at the end.
So, in this video, I'm going to give you the straight-up red flags first.
We're going to talk about the red flags of high cortisol and possibly fasting a little too much.
Secondly, we're going to cover what this study, this 14-study meta-analysis on fasting and cortisol,
actually found.
Third, I'm going to give you a fasting blueprint to follow, how to structure your fast to avoid high
cortisol in the first place.
And then lastly, I will give you a very specific kind of fasting strategy that is very cool and can
actually reboot your nervous system and help you a little bit more with those high levels of
cortisol and bring them down.
Before I get into the specific red flags, I put a link down below for something that's very, very,
very important if you're fasting.
It is the multivitamin stack that I recommend.
When you're fasting, you're reducing calories, you're reducing food intake, good multivitamin is
important.
I don't think you should rely on a multivitamin, I don't think that should be your baseline
foundation.
I think you should get good quality food, but the reality is when we're fasting, we don't get
adequate nutrition a lot of times.
So, is cool because it has two different stacks.
It has a morning stack and an evening stack, and within these stacks, it has these micro-
encapsulated beads.
So, you actually have delayed absorption of certain compounds so that that don't have interference.
For example, magnesium and calcium shouldn't be taken together.
They cancel each other out.
But you can take them together and have them delay certain absorption.
Like different color beads is a different compound.
So, it's going to break down different minerals, different vitamins.
Super intelligent, very cool.
And that link down below is also for a special discount on Fyhealth.
So, check them out underneath this video, top one in the description.
The first red flag we need to pay attention to is amplified skin irritation, redness, or puffiness.
Or here's a big one, acne popping up out of nowhere.
These are really important things to pay attention to.
High circulating cortisol can actually change our skin entirely.
That's why when you get stressed out, you might notice a pimple, right?
You might break out more.
Okay, but you need to look for the subtle things.
Are you noticing like even on your body?
Are you noticing like oh, I've got these little like cysts that are forming like a zit's trying to
perform, but it's not coming all the way through?
Does that seem to line up with stress?
Well, you may not notice the stress because it might just become so normal to you.
You're fasting a lot, so you have dysregulated hormones, you have dysregulated T3, dysregulated
thyroid, dysregulated cortisol, and it's showing up this way.
That's your first sign you might need to back off the fasting or throw some like extra measures to
calm your system.
Another big one is your hair shedding.
People think like oh, I go through these phases.
I'm just getting older.
I'm losing hair.
No, a lot of times when you are in either extreme caloric deficit, extreme stress, or high cortisol
in general, what's going to happen is your follicle can actually start to degrade and even die.
Right?
So, essentially your hair is going to thin and it's going to start shedding.
This is a very early sign and it's not something to be freaking out about.
You're not completely losing your hair.
It is entirely reversible and even is graying of your hair.
If you can take the steps to reduce the stress, can maybe not fast so much for a little while.
Or again, at the end of this video I'll give a specific strategy that would work really well in this
case.
Another one is your brittle nails, right?
Brittle nails are a tremendous sign that your IGF and insulin levels are so low and T3 is so low
that you're not able to actually repair properly.
It shows up there first before you start breaking down connective tissue or other things that might
be more problematic.
One of the biggest ones is waking up early, super wired.
Like an example is waking up at 4:00 a.m.
feeling I'm good to go.
I'm wired.
I'm ready to start my day.
I couldn't go back to sleep if I if I tried.
You get up and then like 4 hours later you're like, "Oh man, I should have slept in more." But you
couldn't have.
It wouldn't have mattered.
What's happening is your cortisol is peaking so early and then it's crashing and then it's peaking
again later in the evening and you're finding yourself actually getting a second wind way too late
at like 6:00, 7:00, 8:00 p.m.
And then you're like, "Well, I might as well stay up.
I have energy now." So now your your rhythms are just so out of whack.
So you're getting these early spikes that are waking you up.
This is such a telltale sign and it's getting you before the cortisol is totally out of whack where
it's just remaining high all the time.
If you can catch it at this point, that is a great time to catch and see that warning sign and back
things off a little bit.
Fast a little less.
Eat a little more carbohydrates and lower the fat content for a little while if this happens.
It can actually cause a big It can actually trigger a big response parasympathetically where you
actually calm yourself down.
Not saying you do it forever.
We'll talk more about that in a minute.
Cold hands is another one and that doesn't just come from calories and like low T3.
Cortisol can actually cause this too.
Okay, you're actually having these major shifts here.
Now another one that's very wild is salt cravings.
Okay, the salt is something that is telling your body eat.
There's a reason why salt licks are out in pastures and animals can find them no matter what.
Salt is critical, but it also is one of these things where when we become deficient in nutrients or
we're ultra stressed and there's more demand, the body's going to crave salt.
It's going to crave salt for for Okay, it's going to crave salt for neuronal signaling and it's
going to crave salt simply because the body knows, the brain knows that if you're going to eat salt,
you're probably going to eat food.
We didn't develop these sugar cravings naturally, but we did develop salt cravings to a certain
degree naturally.
We require it.
But now I want to talk about what this study found.
Before I get into the blueprint of how to kind of restore cortisol via fasting.
This was a study that was published in 2021.
It was published in Nutrients.
Again, it looked at 14 different studies and it looked at all kinds of different fasting.
It looked at alternate day fasting, it looked at Ramadan, it looked at skipping breakfast, skipping
dinner, all kinds of different varieties of TRF and just intermittent fasting.
Eating in the morning, eating in the evening.
Looked at all of them.
Here's what they found.
There were wide varieties of different hormonal cascades and issues that happened.
But the thing that was the most prevalent was that cortisol diurnal rhythms were thrown out of whack
and cortisol tended to be elevated.
But cortisol was less whacked out.
In fact, it was actually quite decent in the ones where people fasted through the late afternoon and
the evening or just ate their bulk of their calories earlier in the day.
So even if you're someone that's fasting and doing like 16:8, what they found is that if the bulk of
the calories were eaten earlier and they tapered from there, cortisol did not elevate as much.
This is huge when you look at this much data.
The bottom line is that once the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis was messed up from high
cortisol, that's when all the other hormonal issues happened.
The T3, even dysregulated glucagon and insulin, glucose intolerance, a lot of this stemmed from the
HPA axis being out of whack.
They found one other thing though.
What seemed to be a big important factor was how many calories they ate when they weren't fasting.
Were they chronically deprived or were they compensating some calories when they weren't fasting?
And this leads us to the blueprint, things that you can do.
The number one thing you can do is eat enough when you're not fasting.
One of the biggest problems that has come from mainstream fitness discussions and mainstream
nutrition discussion is roping simple fasting with caloric restriction, conflating the two.
I understand that yes, people drop fat when they fast because they are calorically restricted.
But that is denying the fact that it is a different form of caloric restriction.
It is an aggressive form of caloric restriction.
It is a signal because of the stressor and it is also a bunch of different things happening at once,
cellular repair, autophagy, high cortisol, low insulin happening in a confined period.
If you tell people that it's just caloric restriction, they're going to want to restrict calories
even more when they're not fasting.
You need to explain the fact that when you are fasting and that is just an extreme stressor and
shock to the system and you need to compensate with more calories when you are eating.
So important if you want to preserve your hormones, preserve your cortisol.
The other thing that's become a problem is because we talk about it just as caloric restriction,
people just will do a 16-hour fast every day.
Daily 16:8, it's like the cool thing to do.
But what we're seeing now with the literature and I propose your new baseline, baseline regular day,
every day a 12-hour fast.
Simple 12-hour overnight fast.
That's barely a fast but that should be your baseline, not 16 hours as your baseline.
Then you throw these longer fasts in, 18-20 hours on a consistent basis a couple days per week.
No more of 16 being your baseline.
It's not good.
You are making it so that your cortisol is peaking at all kinds of weird times.
You're having delayed spikes, early spikes, constant spikes.
We don't want this.
We want you to be set up for success for the long term.
One of the more important things, too, we are learning that when you are stressed, you should not
fast.
Back off the fasting.
Take time off of fasting when you are ultra stressed or sick.
Not because this is bad for that one fast, you're not going to get the benefit.
Remember, I talked about this in another video, the little changes that you make to cortisol and
hormones have huge radius of how they affect.
It's like firing a missile.
Millimeters of difference when you launch make miles of difference at the target.
So, when you affect cortisol and you spike it high on these one or two days where you're extra
stressed, it can affect you weeks down the line with that high cortisol, extra stress.
You should take that time off when you're stressed, and you should focus on recovery and eating
well, not stressing your body.
Another thing that you can simply do is strategically adding carbs at the end of your fast.
A little bit of honey, a little bit of rice, but no fat, right?
Keep the carbs in there because the carbs are going to spike insulin at the right time that can
blunt cortisol.
Don't bash insulin, we need the stuff.
And I'm not saying you need carbs all the time.
I am saying if you've gone 20 hours without eating, you're going to be just fine having 20 or 30 g
of carbs.
As a matter of fact, it's going to shift that parasympathetic tone and probably make it better for
you.
It's going to make you recover better and burn more fat, restore your thyroid hormones, and feel
better.
Just trust me on this.
Here is the reboot strategy I promised you I'd talk about because I think this is really important.
It's called the 5:2 approach, and you want to do it every once in a while when you feel like you've
just been fasting too much and cortisol's high.
You should do this even if you're someone that's just been dieting, trying to lose fat, and has
spiked cortisol.
What you're going to do is you're going to actually eat normally for 5 days.
Just eat a breakfast, eat a lunch, eat a dinner, even eat a little more than you normally would if
you want to.
Just don't eat junk.
Try to add the calories in.
Get that G flux, that extra movement and extra calories in.
Then on the weekends, fast through the weekends.
Maybe even consider doing a 48-hour fast.
There was a study in endocrinology that actually found the biggest spike in cortisol is actually at
the beginning of a fast anyway.
So, you might as well just capitalize on that anyway.
So, do a 48-hour fast, but better yet for most regular people, do one meal a day on the weekends.
So, Saturday eat at dinner earlier in the day.
Sunday eat at dinner earlier in the day, 3-4 hours before bed, maybe even 4:00 p.m.
if you want to.
Or have a big lunch, just do one meal a day.
And then on the weekdays, go right back to eating normal.
What this does is it restores thyroid, it restores that parasympathetic state because you're getting
enough rest and digest, I am fed signals.
I'm not saying eat your heart's desire and gain a bunch of weight.
I am saying we need to signal to the body that we are safe, we are okay, we can recover, we can
lower cortisol.
And then when it's time to pull lever and stress the body with some cortisol for fat burning, we do
it, we do it aggressively, and then we come back home.
I kind of think of it as like how is a special forces operator think?
How do they work, right?
They train, they train, they train, they do their baseline, then they go in, they have the whatever
they need to do, and then they come back, right?
It's just simple like that.
Keep your body in a calm state and then shock it with the stressors and come back.
You know, I did a video that talks about how protein can trigger autophagy very similarly to a fast
in some ways.
This is a good video to watch because it can teach you how temporarily just doing high protein but
moderate calories would be a great way to say take a break from a fast now and then.
So, that video explains that cool mechanism of autophagy right here, which is like a cellular
repair.
So, check that video out and as always, I'll see you tomorrow.
