Imagine this.
You just finished a seemingly healthy lunch and all of a sudden you're feeling really brain foggy.
You can't focus.
You're feeling inflamed.
You just don't feel right.
So, you start racking your mind thinking, "Did I have a bunch of carbs?
Am I having a blood sugar crash?
Did I consume a bunch of sugar?" And you didn't.
Well, there's something that can be affecting brain fog that can affect all of us.
And we're going to get into the details of how it works, but it has to do with histamines.
And most people think that histamines are just related to allergies.
No.
There is a huge body of scientific literature that suggests that histamine liberating foods, foods
that trigger the immune cells to release histamine in the body can bind to certain receptors that
make you feel very brain foggy.
Now, sugar can make you feel this way too cuz sugar can inhibit the conversion of glutamate to GABA
in the brain, making you feel kind of anxious and not able to have that calm feeling.
So certainly sugar could be problematic, but histamines are a sneaky one and something that we can
course correct pretty easily.
And I'll teach you how to do that in this video.
I'll teach you what foods to avoid in certain times and also just things that you can do to help the
metabolism of histamine out of your body a little bit faster.
Now, sugar is still important and if you're trying to reduce sugar in your house, I recommend you
check out Haya Kids multivitamins.
So I have kids and they love their multivitamins from Haya because they don't have sugar in them.
They can have a couple of them and they're getting their nutrients in, but it's a treat for them.
So, if you want to be able to give your kids a multivitamin, not have a bunch of sugar, I recommend
you check out Haya.
That is a 50% off discount link that's down below in the top right of the description.
My kids love it.
It's like a ritual for them, and I feel good about giving it to them.
So, check them out down below.
So, there's certain foods that have high amounts of histamine in them already.
These are things like avocados or certain fermented foods or things like that, right?
We've talked about those in other videos and I can go into more detail, but those high amounts of
histamine in them already, right?
So what happens is those histamines trigger a little bit of an immune response and can make you feel
inflamed and funky.
But one of the hidden ones are going to be foods that are histamine liberators.
And what these do is they don't actually have histamine in them themselves.
They trigger our immune cells to release histamine.
And when they release histamine, these histamines bind to four different receptors, H1, H2, H3, and
H4.
The H3 receptor happens to be connected with the brain and the central nervous system.
So, this can directly make you feel inflamed when histamine binds to that.
Remember, it's effectively an immune cell that's now binding to a receptor in the nervous system.
So, if you've ever felt like, I feel irritable, I feel brain foggy, I feel reactive, that's what can
happen.
So, cutting to the chase, what are these foods?
Well, citrus fruits, believe it or not, are heavy histamine liberators.
Shellfish is a heavy histamine liberator.
Strawberries are a histamine liberator, but the sneaky ones that work their way in there, sulfites
and artificial dyes.
So, this is where things can get sneaky because maybe you had a diet coke or maybe you had something
that has a dye in it, right?
Well, these dyes trigger a histamine release and sulfites and things like dried fruit.
So, a perfect example is you sat down and you had like a chicken Waldorf salad or something.
You had salad.
So, it had some strawberries, maybe had some apples, maybe you had some dried cranberries in it,
maybe you had a citrus dressing, right?
So, I'm not saying that that's a bad food.
I'm not saying that at all.
What I'm saying is that these histamine liberators when you're in a compromised state can really
make you feel brain foggy because they will bind to that H3 receptor.
So what puts you in a compromised state?
Well, sleep deprivation.
It makes it so you cannot metabolize the histamine.
You don't break it down.
Also, stress.
Okay, stress can absolutely make it so you are not able to break down histamine as well and it
compromises the gut barrier integrity.
Also, hormonal shifts.
So, if you're PMSing, that's going to make it so that you're much more sensitive to histamine
because it already increases histamine.
For some reason, people don't want to talk about histamine all the time.
I think people want to just lean into, well, it's simply calories in and calories out and maybe
you're inflamed because you're eating too much or you're overweight.
Well, I know lots of people that are eating really well and are still battling with their weight,
still battling with inflammation.
And I also know people that are healthy weight and still have inflammation issues with certain foods
because it's not as simple as just calories in, calories out.
There are individual things that happen with certain foods.
The other thing is we have to look at foods that are already high in histamine.
Chocolate, fermented foods, lots of different fish.
So salmon can be really high in histamines.
Tuna can be high in histamines.
So you're supposed to avoid these foods forever.
No.
What you're supposed to do is understand that when you are feeling a little bit stressed out or when
you are sleepd deprived, you're best to avoid those kinds of foods.
Now, rather than list off tons and tons of foods here, you could easily do a Google search and look
high histamine foods, but the reality is is that this is a big contributor of brain fog.
So, what we got to do is we have to look at ways to sort of combat this.
So, how do we increase the metabolism of histamines out of our body?
For one, if you feeling brain fog after eating some of these foods, try taking something called DAO.
DAO is a supplement that is called diamine oxidase.
And what that does is it helps metabolize the histamine out of your body.
We have damine oxidase in our gut already, but there's been some cool scientific literature that has
shown that if you increase or you take a supplement form of it, it'll increase it by up to 60%.
So, it's not something we want to do all the time, but let's say, hey, I'm feeling that feeling
again after lunch.
I feel brain foggy.
I didn't have that many carbs.
What's going on?
It very well could just be this immune response.
Now, another thing to think of is maybe this is why you're having a hard time losing weight.
Histamines and inflammation can absolutely play a role in that.
If you are constantly battling inflammation, that's going to impact insulin resistance, right?
You have to pay attention to these kinds of things.
It absolutely matters.
Another thing that you may want to add to the mix, if you're starting to get really sensitive after
eating certain foods or eating lunch and you're feeling inflamed and brain foggy, a simple
supplement like glutamine can make a huge difference.
Glutamine is going to be a fuel for the gut.
So, it fuels the gut cells, allowing the gut to essentially heal up and allow for more gut mucosal
barrier integrity.
The reason that this helps us is because it's again we metabolize and process histamine.
We break it down in the gut and if our gut is not doing well then we cannot process this stuff.
So brain fog starts in the gut.
So bone broth, collagen, glutamine, occasional fasting to give the gut a break.
This is all really important for the gut to be able to repair so that you can process histamine and
watch what happens.
Just the joint pain, the brain fog, it all kind of lifts.
So does the sugar really matter?
Do we need to pay attention to the sugar?
We absolutely do, but that's an entirely different mechanism that's affecting the brain in a
different way.
So, as always, keep it locked to here, my channel.
