So my question is around biotin level.
So on an older podcast, I don't remember which one you mentioned egg white consumption might create
a biotin deficiency.
Right.
I have eaten eight to nine egg whites and one to two whole eggs as part of my breakfast since the
early two thousands, I looked into that a little bit and I do have a red patchy, scaly rash around
my mouth and nose that flares up periodically that started around 2006.
I treat that with ketoconazole cream as prescribed by my dermatologist.
That kind of takes care of it.
But anyway, that plus hair loss, which may be hereditary.
I thought maybe it makes sense for me to have a biotin test.
So I did, and the results came back in the normal range per the labs range, but it was in the bottom
10%.
So I had this done at Boston at Cambridge Biomedical in Massachusetts, and the test result was 492.5
Picograms per milliliter in a range of 221 to 3004.
I wanted to see if you would be concerned about biotin deficiency in this scenario and what your
view of optimal range would be.
It definitely sounds like it could be a biotin deficiency and the plasma or serum biotin level is
not a good marker of biotin status because it's not very sensitive.
And so, if you're in the bottom 10% of it, I would definitely take that as a red flag that you might
have biotin deficiency, the best test for biotin, well, the gold standard for biotin deficiency is
beta-hydroxyisovalerate in the urine after a leucine challenge.
I don't know how you'd get anyone to give you that, but the next best thing is to get a urinary
organic acid test that has as beta-Hydroxyisovaleric acid on it and I know that the Genova ION
panel, which is the one I usually prefer has that, but a lot of other ones do too.
So I, if you get one, I would just check and see whether the beta-hydroxyisovalerate is on the list
of analytes.
Yeah, I would, I wouldn't conclude anything just yet, but I would keep biotin deficiency in the
running for an explanation.
Certainly.
Thank you.
Are there any other, those are the symptoms that I had detected or just noticed or thought...
Is there anything else in particular that you look for in that kind of scenario?
Well, had you not mentioned biotin, biotin would have been at the top but there's a very strong
overlap between...
And I mentioned this in a previous question is a very strong overlap between biotin B6, Omega six
fatty acids and riboflavin.
Okay, well thanks Chris I will check into this test and follow Up.
Thank you.
You're welcome.
Take care.
