Okay, aside from fiber, why is everyone always telling us to eat leafy greens?
I mean, are they magical?
Are they going to make us burn fat?
Are they going to make us feel amazing?
Well, in short, not immediately.
You know, it's kind of a cumulative effect.
But I thought that this video would be a good one because I have a lot of people that get really
tired of eating just spinach and kale.
So, I wanted to give you my five top leafy green vegetables.
And they're not just my top five.
they are on a scoring system that really adequately puts them in place with what are the best
vegetables that you can eat.
Now, what we're going to look at, we're going to look at three different sections of these
vegetables.
We're going to look at the fiber content because we all know that fiber is good for the digestive
system.
A good digestive system means a healthy body.
So, that's obvious.
Then the other one we're going to look at is going to be vitamin and mineral content.
Again, we overlook this.
It's like the word just goes over our heads.
We just, you know, in one ear, out the other.
don't really think about what these vitamins and minerals do, what these micronutrients do on a much
broader scale within our body.
So, we're going to look at that and then we're going to also look at the alkalizing benefits.
We're going to look at the anti-inflammatory benefits and we're going to look at the phytoestrogen
and antioxidant benefits of these leafy green vegetables.
Now, some science has made it simple for us to rate these.
I'm going to explain that to you.
In 2014, a journal that is called preventing chronic disease did a study.
They did this study to help formulate a scoring system on what would be powerhouse fruits and
vegetables, also known as PFV.
So essentially, this scoring system ends up being what's called a PFV score.
Now the way that they started scoring these particular vegetables was they took 47 of them 47
different vegetables that are touted as pretty healthy and they conducted this study.
So they looked at these fruits and vegetables and they said if a given fruit or vegetable contains
10% of the daily value of 17 of the main vitamins and minerals that we need per 100 calories.
I know that's a mouthful.
Then we will score it and give it a top ranking.
So basically this score goes from 1 to 47, the number one all the way down to the 47th food that was
tested.
I'm going to use that as a baseline for what might be the best foods that you can eat.
The number five green, collard greens.
Okay, we're all so tunnel visioned with our spinach and with our kale, we forget that we've got
collard greens out there, but a lot of people don't want to eat them because they're kind of bitter.
The thing is they are so exceptionally high in vitamin A and vitamin K that they ended up getting a
PFV rating of about 10, which in the grand scheme of things ain't too bad.
Now, one of the things that is amazing about collard greens is the ability to bind with acids within
the digestive system that can ultimately help lower your cholesterol levels.
You don't hear that talked about all that much, but if you're trying to lower your cholesterol
levels, collard greens might be one of the best ways to go.
Now, since they are bitter, you do want to sauté them with a little bit of coconut oil.
But here's the cool thing.
Vitamin A is a fat soluble vitamin.
So if you actually cook and sauté the collar greens in the oil, you're going to absorb more of that
vitamin A to begin with.
All right, number four is kale.
And I know I kind of made fun of it earlier in the video, but here's the thing.
Kale doesn't even make the list of PFV, but it's here for a different reason.
The reason kale is here is because it's a protein powerhouse.
Contains all nine of the essential amino acids that you need, which is pretty rare in a vegetable.
Therefore, if you're a vegetarian or you're vegan, kale is an ultimate solution for that.
Additionally, if you watch a lot of my videos, you know I'm always talking about omega-3s and omega
sixes and that healthy balance between the two.
You want to have a higher level of omega-3 than omega 6.
Well, news flash, kale contains higher levels of omega-3 versus omega6.
That's something that that PFV scoring doesn't really look at, and that's why kale made my list, but
not the PFV scoring list.
Number three, don't throw away the beet stems.
After you cut off the leafy greens from the beets, throw them in a salad.
They are one of the most nutrient-dense leafy greens that you can possibly eat.
In fact, in that entire PFV scoring study, they are ranked number four.
So, one of the top greens that you can eat.
And one of the main reasons that I like them the most is they've got more iron than spinach.
You know, we always hear that if you have an iron deficiency, you should eat spinach.
Well, what if you're sick of spinach?
What if you want something with a little bit more substance?
Well, there's not a whole lot in the way of leafy greens that give you that iron until you come to
beet greens.
Now, in addition to that, super high in magnesium, which you don't get in a lot of leafy greens as
well.
I've done videos about magnesium.
Higher levels of magnesium lead to higher levels of serotonin, which lead to higher levels of
melatonin, which leads to better sleep and a better mood.
So, there's a whole multitude of reasons why you should not throw away those beet stems.
You can sauté those up, or you can just mix them into a salad as well.
Okay, the number two food is spinach.
Again, another one I made fun of a lot, but I want to break it down and give you the reason why it's
great.
Okay, it's super high in a keratenoid called luteine.
Now, luteine is great for overall brain health.
Has a lot of positive benefits, but additionally, spinach, in addition to being high in the iron
that I talked about earlier, it's also high in zinc.
It's one of the best natural sources of zinc.
Now, if you're a male and you're trying to improve your natural testosterone levels, spinach is
great because you're going to get those levels of zinc.
Now, you could easily go take a zinc supplement, but come on, we all know it's better to get it from
a nice whole food source.
Spinach is also extremely high in vitamin C, which can help you lower those cortisol levels.
Ultimately, just one of the most nutrient-dense green leafy vegetables that you can eat.
And this leads me in to number one, Swiss chard.
All right, so it's not ranked number one on the PFV.
It's actually ranked number three.
But here's why it makes my list.
So, it is extremely high in something called syringic acid.
Syringic acid has been shown to reduce blood sugar.
This makes Swiss chard an ultimate green leafy vegetable for those that are diabetic or those that
are trying to reduce their blood sugar.
Now, the reason that Swiss chard is really number one for me is the fact that it can help detox your
body.
In fact, it's been ranked as the number one food to help detox the body.
And that's because of something called betalin.
That betalin helps the removal of toxins from the body.
And it does so really, really quickly.
So, if you add Swiss chard to a couple of meals per day in replacement of your typical salad or
possibly in replacement of your spinach, you can definitely get a positive impact when it comes to
skin clarity, mental clarity, and just overall well-being.
So, there you have it.
There is my five favorite leafy green vegetables.
So, go ahead and rotate them out throughout your meal to get that wide spectrum of nutrients,
vitamins, and minerals, and start monitoring how much better you feel.
I'll see you soon in the next
