Steven: So I just wanted to respond to the question about the Randle Cycle.
Because there's a few people on the internet right now that have YouTube channels that are talking
about the Randle Cycle and that's what they're claiming that that's what's made America fat because
we all eat a mixed diet and part of me agrees with this because yes we've, you know, a diet that is
mixed is hyperpalatable.
However, personally I've tried very-low carb diets.
I've tried very low-fat diets and I feel awful on both.
And so for me a diet with like meat and potatoes and fruit and vegetables with about 30% protein 30%
fat and 40% carbs that's where I feel best and I can control my...
Chris: Let me ask you a question.
Steven: Yeah.
Chris: What kind of meat are you eating and how much added fat do you add?
Because I feel like unless you're eating very lean meats it would be fairly easy to hit 30% fat
without adding fat to your diet, without adding added oils.
Unless it's from butter and olive oil and stuff that's added in.
Steven: Sure I mean I don't really add a lot of fat to my meats it's mostly just like just steak and
lean… Chris: But to the other foods like the vegetables and the potatoes, like are you are you
adding like butter in the potato and all of those ....
Steven: Only a tiny bit, I don't really...
Chris: So most of your fat is in the natural foods, right?
Steven: Correct.
Chris: Yeah look I mean there's, I just think that, I think like I said before I think the theory, I
guess you're asking a little bit more about the practical question of what's good to do now.
I think the theory is just wrong.
Like the Randle cycle addresses why you would have elevated fatty acids or glucose, because if
you're outcompeting, if you're fatty acids are outcompeting, glucose, you're going to have
hyperglycemia, or you're going to require more insulin than you would otherwise require to bring
that glucose into the cells, and vice-versa, right?
So you're more likely to have circulating energy supplies in your blood due to poor tissue uptake
when you're consuming these things together, you're more likely to be more dependent on a higher
insulin response.
That's primarily related to the metabolic outcome.
It doesn't mean that mixing them causes diabetes, it just means that there is more substrate
competition and all things equal if one person's on the edge of diabetes, if two people are right on
the edge of diabetes, and one eats a mixed diet there's a higher probability that they're going to
go over that edge because of the substrate competition contributing to the hyperglycemia and the
greater insulin requirement than someone who's on a low-carb or low-fat diet, but that doesn't mean
that a mixed diet is bad or that it's not optimal for you.
So first of all you're not, if you have no evidence of metabolic dysfunction on a mixed diet, then
there's no issue.
Second of all, getting fat like that, that's kind of the same error that the low-, that the the sort
of Taubesean carb-centric view of body fat gain is making, which is the idea that the glycemic
response or the insulin is going to be what makes you fat, when actually the caloric balance is what
makes you fat.
And you know that like there's a little bit of truth in the carb-centric, the carbohydrate
hypothesis of obesity.
There's an element of truth in that some people are going to have blood sugar dysregulation on a
carb-heavy diet that leads them to eat more food because their blood sugar fluctuations are so great
that hyperinsulinemia is driving them to eat more.
Like there's probably a subset of people for whom that's a factor, but overwhelmingly that is not
the main cause of obesity and to say the Randle cycle is the cause of obesity is making the exact
same error because it's focusing on the glycemic response and the insulin response instead of the
overall caloric balance.
What makes you fat is eating too much food.
You know, the only, the only thing that you should change about the calories in calories out (CICO)
hypothesis on a practical level is to say that it tells you very little about the behavioral
modifications that someone needs to make to sustain the caloric deficit over time and so you must
have, you must engage with what are the possible effects of all those diets plus all the habits and
lifestyle and mindsets and everything that plays into eating behavior, all of that exists and it
causes nuance, and then nutrient partitioning is affected by protein and exercise in a way that says
for any given caloric balance how much goes into fat storage, how much goes into muscle building.
Other than that, like, it’s right.
So why do people get fat?
I don't think we need to hash out the whole thing here like I'll just largely endorse Stephan
Guyenet's view, it's basically the proliferation of hyperpalatable food.
A mixed diet leverages the principle of creating a hyperpalatable diet by mixing carbs and fat, but
your diet doesn't sound hyperpalatable.
You're not telling me, you know, compare what you're eating to an Oreo cookie.
If your Oreo cookie is saying, I need this amount of sweetness, I need this amount of creaminess,
and this amount of crunch, I need this amount of, like, take out a little bit of bitter and this
compound, like just mix it together to make you eat more.
Or a Lay's potato chip has the carbs, the fat, and the salt in just the right proportion and then
the mouthfeel, the texture, the baking temperature, the glycation products and the little browning
to make you bet you can't eat just one.
It's not like the percent carbs and fat that's doing that.
It's the way that they're combined, it's the mouthfeel, it's the texture, it's the salt, it's the
ratios, it's that stuff.
Like eating the natural fats of meat with vegetables with a small amount of fat added will bring the
percent up, but it's just not hyperpalatable.
Steven: Yeah, I thank you for that.
I'm just going to say one more thing.
I agree with you with that 100% and the couple people that are parroting this idea that the Randle
cycle causes obesity are completely ignoring the hyperpalatability aspect and they're just saying
that it's the mixing of fat and carbs and the competition and the Randle cycle.
That's why I wanted to bring this up.
Chris: Yeah way off, way off.
All right thanks man.
Thank you.
