Do you ever feel cranky or foggy or hungry in the hours after a meal, especially when it's rich in
carbs?
Well, then this vidoe may be just for you.
I'm Dr.
Chris Masterjohn of ChrisMasterjohnPhD.com and you're watching Chris Masterjohn Lite, where the name
of the game is “Details?
Shmetails.
Just me what works!” and today we’re talking about why you may tolerate sugar better than starch.
The first thing that happens when we eat starch is we begin breaking it down into sugar right in our
mouths with an enzyme contained in our saliva, and although we may not notice the sweet taste, our
bodies do, and that sweet taste generated in our mouths allows our bodies to know that carbohydrate
is coming and allows our bodies to prepare for that carbohydrate so that we can can digest it,
absosrb it, and metabolize it in a smooth and stable way.
The problem is that some of us have a lot of this enzyme in our saliva and some of us don’t.
And if we don't have much of that enzyme, what happens when we eat starch is we don't break it down
to sugar.
in our mouths and our body doesn't know that it's coming.
and then when it does come and we do digest it, our body isn't prepared to handle it, so our blood
sugar can spike up too much and crash back down too much as a result and that can make us feel like
we’re swinging, whether it’s our mood or our energy, we’re swinging just like our blood sugar’s
swinging.
So, there's not a good way to test your genetics but you can do a really simple experiment at home
just to see what kind of foods you tolerate best.
So what you would want to do for this experiment is to compare how you respond to an equal amount of
carbohydrate from sugar and from starch.
If you have a glucometer you could measure how your blood sugar responds, or you could just log your
symptoms and write down how you feel after these meals.
And you want to try to do each meal several times, in random order, and under pretty much the same
conditions.
So, for example, do each one when you wake up in the morning, or do each one at lunch.
And you want to make sure the carbohydrate load is the same.
So the purest way to do this would be to purchase some potato starch and to purchase some pure
dextrose and weigh out 50 g of each of those.
You can also use foods, for example you could compare potatoes to overripe bananas, but if you do
that you should look up on nutritiondata.com the amount of carbohydrate in a given weight of that
food and weigh it out to make sure that you’re getting the same carbohydrate load from each of the
two foods.
However you choose to do it you should try to make sure that you get a few measurements, say three
of each, so three with the banana, three with the potato, three with the dextrose, three with the
potato starch.
And you want to do ‘em in random order.
So flip a coin each day to decide which one you do.
And if you find that you tolerate the sugar better than the starch, then what I would do is try to
find the amount of natural sugar that it takes for you to be able to add to a starch-rich meal to be
able to feel well with that meal.
So for example let's say that you want to eat potatoes or rice or whathaveyou as your starch.
Well, if you know that you respond better to sugar it may be that all you need to do is add a little
bit of sugar to the beginning of that meal.
So maybe eating a teaspoon of honey or two teaspoons of honey before the meal is going to be enough
to do the trick.
So just fine whatever is the minimal dose of natural sugar that you need to add, and then if that
works you have a quick fix that will allow you to eat a broader spectrum of foods, and to feel good
after you eat them.
Now.
Don't try this if you have diabetes.
If you have a medical condition, make sure that you talk to your doctor before you try any kind of
experiment related to your blood sugar.
But if you're healthy and you just want to be able to tolerate more foods and to feel better after
you eat, then I think this is a great experiment try.
All right, signing off, this is Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com.
You’ve been watching Chris Masterjohn Lite, and I’ll see you in the next video.
