George: Hello.
My question today is about what I can do when I know I'm consuming oxalates.
Is there something I can take, like maybe potassium citrate or some sort of supplement to inhibit
the absorption of oxalic acid?
Chris: I would make sure you're getting three to 400 milligrams of calcium in a meal.
George: Okay.
Chris: Because the calcium binds to oxalate and prevents its absorption.
George: And that won't go through the digestive tract?
Chris: You can't do anything about that.
If you're eating oxalate, it's either going to be in your digestive tract or it's going to get
absorbed into the blood.
You can't do anything else with it.
George: Yeah, because the kidney stone is calcium oxalate.
Yeah?
Chris: Well it's not going to your kidneys if it doesn't leave the intestines.
George: That's what I'm trying to prevent.
Chris: So your best bet is to keep it in the intestines and calcium will do that.
George: Okay.
Okay.
Chris: But keeping your urine pH in the 6.4 to 6.8 range will also prevent calcium oxalate from
crystallizing in your urine.
George: Because you can- Chris: And good alkalinizing things would be generally the potassium salts,
not chloride, but food-based potassium would be very effective at that because the potassium is
balanced with a variety of organic acids that have alkalinizing effects in the food.
And then if you do take a potassium supplement, if it's citrate or malate or something like that,
then that would also have that effect.
George: Oh, okay.
What about sodium bicarbonate?
Chris: The calcium is what's preventing the oxalate from getting absorbed.
George: Yeah, that's basically the answer to my question.
What about sodium bicarbonate for increasing the pH in the urine?
Chris: It's kind of a bandaid solution.
So I think it definitely works and you might need to do that, but it's better to have just the raw
materials available for the kidney to regulate the pH in its normal way.
Bicarbonate is kind of like a ...
It's a very quickly but transiently acting way to kind of make the pH change.
But if you're doing it chronically, I think that potentially comes to the possibility of some
digestion issues.
And so it works, it's just you don't need it if you're getting enough potassium usually.
George: So you're saying a better solution would be potassium citrate or malate?
Chris: Well, I think the best solution would be just get more potassium from your food.
That's definitely the superior option, but potassium citrate would work.
George: Okay.
I appreciate it, Chris.
And Happy Easter.
Thank you.
Chris: You're welcome.
Thank you.
Same to you.
