Tight tendons?
Collagen might be the answer.
Hi.
I'm Dr.
Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com and you are watching Chris Masterjohn Lite where the name
of the game is "Details?
Shmeetails.
Just tell me what works!
And one thing that can work is taking your collagen supplement before you exercise.
Why?
because this is the best way to improve collagen synthesis in your tendons.
If your tendons are stiff, if you have any symptoms of soreness and achy joints, anything that might
relate to trying to get the collagen better synthesized inside your connective tissue then taking it
before exercise may be the key.
So Danny Lennon of Sigma Nutrition had done an interview with Keith Baar who did this research.
And I will provide the link to that interview so you can listen to the whole thing in the
description of this video.
Now what he found was that 15 grams of collagen, but not 5 grams, was the dose that you needed in
order to improve collagen synthesis in your tendons.
And the way you need to get it to the right places is to take it before exercise.
Why?
In the last video we talked about getting glycine before sleep.
Your brain is just always taking up whatever it needs from your blood as it passes by because it has
an active regulated way to get it in.
Your muscles will take up the amino acids that they need because they're very metabolically active
and they have the ability to take things up in a regulated fashion.
But if you want to get your collagen into your connective tissue, which does not have a high
metabolism, which isn't active and doing lots of things all the time, you really just have to
increase the blood flow to that tissue and you get the blood flowing into the tissue during
exercise.
If you take the collagen after you exercise, by the time it gets through your digestion it's too
late.
So you have to take it before you exercise in order for it to be present in the bloodstream as the
blood starts pumping nutrients into your tendons.
Now Keith Baar's recommendation was to take 15 grams of collagen alongside 50 milligrams of vitamin
C because vitamin C helps in the synthesis.
I'm a little I'm a little skeptical that you actually need the vitamin C because I think your
general vitamin C status overall is going to be more important, but it certainly can't hurt.
So my preferred collagen is hydrolyzed collagen from Great Lakes or Vital Proteins.
So you want to get 15 grams of that, take it alongside either 50 milligrams of a straight ascorbic
acid powder or a small piece of fruit that provides somewhere in that vicinity of vitamin C, do that
before you exercise, just enough time to make sure that you're not cramping up from digestion.
You probably don't need to worry about it with something that small, but maybe 20 minutes before you
go out to exercise, start exercising and pump that collagen right into your tendons.
I don't know how long it takes for this to pay off, but if you try it and you're looking for
specific symptoms related to that let me know how it works.
All right.
I hope you fount this useful.
Signing off this is Chris Masterjohn of chrismasterjohnphd.com.
You've been watching Chris Masterjohn Lite.
And I will see you in the next video.
