I want to give you three ways that you can lower your blood sugar quickly and effectively through
three different avenues.
One with a vitamin, one with a food, and one with a particular style of exercise.
Now, reducing your blood sugar isn't just for diabetics.
There's a lot of times when we just know that we've had too many carbs and we need to lower that
blood sugar quickly.
So, here's how you're going to do it.
In the first round with a vitamin, I want you to try taking fineek.
Now, finugreek has been shown to lower blood sugar quite dramatically when taken in 500 milligram
intervals in the morning and in the evening.
So, 500 milligrams two times per day.
You'll notice a pretty significant decrease in blood sugar just from doing that alone.
Now, from a dietary standpoint, I want you to try eating your carbohydrates after your proteins,
fats, and veggies.
You see, in a 2011 study, it was found that eating your carbohydrates after your protein, your
veggies, and your fats resulted in a much less postmeal blood sugar than it did in those that ate
their carbs with or before their proteins and veggies.
And this effect didn't just last for hours, but it lasted for generally the rest of the day and
sometimes even longer depending on the carb source.
Additionally, studies have found that simply adding garlic to your carb sources can reduce the
impact in terms of your blood sugar as well.
Now, as for exercise, the best way that you can lower your blood sugar in the quickest amount of
time is going to be by doing highintensity bouts of exercise.
That's basically defined as doing quick bursts of activity followed by short rest periods and then
more intense bursts.
It's basically highintensity interval training.
Now, this doesn't just affect blood sugar in the short term.
Studies have shown that blood sugar is affected and lowered two to three days after a single bout of
high-intensity exercise.
So, all you really need to do is 30 second sprints, a couple minutes rest, and 30 second sprints, a
couple minutes rest, and you're going to basically condition your body to have a little bit of a
lower set point in terms of blood sugar.
So, these little tricks can not only help you if you're diabetic, but they may help you if you're
simply trying to keep a lean body and be in the best possible shape.
As always, keep it locked in here on my videos and I will see you in the next
